Corruption ?
Not in our company … Preventing corruption in corporate life Preface Conscious of its central position within the European Union , Belgium has , for many years , taken a firm line against corruption in national and international transactions .
For this purpose , a major reform was carried out at the end of the 1990s .
This affected aspects of both the criminal liability of legal persons and the implications in fiscal and criminal law .
Since then , action against corruption has been a priority of the Belgian government in its National Security Plan 2008-2011 .
Corruption occurs in various forms and attracts severe penalties .
By means of this brochure , Belgium wants to raise the awareness of companies engaged in the international markets for goods and services about the consequences of corruption .
Responsible management requires a clear definition of what is acceptable or unacceptable .
Belgium hopes that this brochure will raise the awareness of commercial players and warn them of the risks associated with their business contacts .
What is corruption ?
Corruption is a manifestation of criminality .
It can be very damaging to companies and to society .
It leads to distortion of competition , frightens off investors and jeopardizes the further development of sound companies .
Corruption is morally reprehensible and undermines trust in society and in democracy .
The business community sees it as the main obstacle to investment in certain countries .
In the longer term , corruption adds to costs , both to the community and for companies .
Often it is accompanied by a deterioration of quality and safety .
For a natural or a legal person , corruption means the soliciting , acceptance or receipt of any form of advantage , in an official context , to gain acceptance for a given practice or behaviour .
It is also the offering or granting of such advantage to induce a person to accept such behaviour .
The law applies to Belgian individuals and companies active both in Belgium and abroad .
Belgium also makes no distinction between national , international and foreign office-holders .
It makes no difference whether the bribery takes place directly or through intermediaries ; nor whether the advantage is intended for oneself or for a third party .
It is also irrelevant whether it happens in the public or the private sector .
Both the person offering such advantages and the recipient can be convicted of corruption .
Therefore Belgian law covers both private and public bribery and both active and passive bribery .
In other words , corruption may occur at various levels and in various forms .
All these forms of corruption are criminal offences in Belgium .
In fact an incidental condition applies to private corruption : it must have taken place without prior knowledge and without the authorisation of , depending on the case , the board of directors or the general assembly , the principal or the employer .
The Belgian Criminal Code contains two chapters of importance in combating corruption .
They are Criminal Code Articles 246 ff . , which concern public bribery , and 504bis and ter on private bribery .
Penalties range from six months to three years imprisonment .
If there are aggravating circumstances , the custodial sentence may be up to 10 years .
Fines imposed may amount to up to 100 000 euros .
Criminal proceedings not only attract negative publicity .
A legal person may also be struck off the list of contractors eligible for government contracts .
In Belgium , anyway , companies are debarred from awards of public contracts if they have been convicted of criminal conspiracy , bribery , fraud , money laundering or any other misdemeanour which , by nature , represents a violation of professional ethics .
Other actions are also punishable .
Thus Article 314 of the Criminal Code punishes restriction of the freedom of bidding or of registration for transfers of ownership , usufruct or leasing of movable or immovable property of a company , of a supply etc .
with 15 days to six months imprisonment and a fine of 100 to 3000 euros .
The tax legislation also specifies that each count of corruption , liable to prosecution under the Criminal Code , both for a natural and for a legal person , cannot be deducted from the basis of tax assessment .
Ex officio , a separate amount of 309 % of the value of the count of corruption is levied on the corporate taxpayer .
Plus the statutory ‘ additional tenths ’ .
The fine can either be imposed cumulatively with the penalty of imprisonment , or separately .
Article 8 of the Law of 10 February 1999 concerning Penalties for Corruption , Moniteur Belge , 23 March 1999 .
Article 11 of the Royal Decree of 23 November 2007 in amendment of the Law of 24 December 1993 on Government Contracts and Certain Contracting of Works , Supplies and Services and Certain Royal Decrees Implementing this Law , Moniteur Belge , 7 December 2007 .
Plus statutory ‘ additional tenths ’ .
Article 219 of the 1992 Income Tax Law .
What can companies do ?
Corruption is one of the main barriers to companies operating on foreign markets .
Depending on the sector and the country , there is a chance of coming into contact with corrupt behaviour sooner or later .
It is therefore as well to be properly prepared for it .
This brochure offers a number of tips on how to avoid and counter corrupt practices .
Codes of conduct forbid corruption , irrespective of its intended purpose .
Therefore the scope of this prohibition is wider than winning or keeping a market .
It applies not only to commission payments to officials , but also to failure to mention such payments in subcontracts , consultancy agreements , contracts of ‘ technical assistance ’ abroad , etc .
Payments to local agents must be limited to settlement for lawfully provided services .
The auditing of corporate financial statements must avoid non-transparent or off-books accounting .
Compliance with the rules on funding of political parties is required , and companies ’ managerial or controlling organs must be informed of accounting irregularities detected .
The main measures constituting good management can be set forth in codes of conduct .
Nevertheless , the best signal to a company ’ s staff is the example set by its managers .
Besides , sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between corruption and normal business contacts .
Grey areas do exist , in which special attention must be paid to resolving awkward situations .
Trading with Saddam Hussein ’ s Iraq was highly profitable , but could also have serious consequences , both for the company ’ s reputation and in criminal law .
Moreover , commission had to be paid to Iraqi officials and their intermediaries .
Belgium punishes the bribing of both foreign officials and people acting for a Belgian government department .
The OECD ( Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ) carries out assessments to ensure that national governments really implement the 1997 anti-bribery convention .
Regrettably , too few companies have so far followed these good practices .
Recognize alarm signals and watch out for risks That corruption and / or extortion by tactless civil servants or other persons can take various forms and cause difficulties to companies is abundantly clear from the following examples .
Consequently it &apos;s important to detect the warning signs at an early stage in order to minimize the risks as much as possible .
A few dollars inside my passport make sure I incur no risk of having to stay an hour longer at the airport while the authorities there check my papers .
My Purchasing Director has concluded a secret agreement with a supplier , who is systematically selected to provide the products which I deliver to my branches .
There are two possibilities : I discreetly give this director the push , so that he has a field day with the competition , or I take legal action against him , without fear of publicity .
My company should demonstrate that it is committed to the price I charge the consumer , without unnecessary and counter-productive commission .
I know that the leaders of a certain country cream something off payments for the supply of commodities .
Should I co-operate with my colleagues from other countries to show them that these practices belong to the past ?
No-one obliges me to do business with them .
I go to a sunny destination ( Madrid / Rome / San Francisco ) with the director of a public institution for my latest product launch .
We spend the whole week on the tests .
Why don ’ t I invite him / her to view my new equipment in the nearest Belgian factory ?
You should also bear in mind some possible penalties , in addition to criminal prosecution , which you may incur if you act this way .
The World Bank may add you to a blacklist of companies and / or individuals , which it consults in connection with various markets which receive subsidies or development aid .
The European Union may suspend payments of subsidies to the programme with which you co-operate .
You should not forget , either , that corruption can be infectious .
If it becomes known in your company that you are bribing officials , this increases the temptation to embezzle the company &apos;s assets or succumb to bribery in individuals &apos; own fields of activity .
The converse is also true if an example of ethical behaviour is set .
Once corrupt , always corrupt ?
If you compromise yourself by fraud , you end up in a vulnerable position : when there is no way back , it becomes difficult to stop paying slush money without exposing yourself to blackmail .
In the event of a commercial dispute , resulting in termination of a contract , it is not possible to reclaim amounts which , by law , do not exist ... Take action : what can a company do in practice ?
Find out for yourself Keeping informed is a good start .
Information is the first and best weapon in the effort which companies should make daily to combat corrupt business practices .
This brochure lists some Belgian and international websites which supplement this information .
For example , take a look at the ICC Rules of Conduct and Recommendations for Combating Extortion and Bribery , compiled by the ICC , an employers &apos; organization .
These can be described as a method of self-regulation , in which the basic rules of prevention of corruption by companies are explained .
Although they have no legal status , these ICC Rules of Conduct outline the most sound business practices .
These Rules of Conduct make it easier for companies to fulfil their statutory obligations and responsibilities .
The ICC also has another important tool at its disposal : Fighting Corruption : International Corporate Integrity Handbook .
This ICC publication ( No .
678 , 2008 edition ) seeks to help international companies obey the ICC Rules and act on the 1997 OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions .
The ICC in Belgium has also published French and Dutch versions of a brochure : &apos; Hoe corruptie voorkomen ? &apos;
/ &apos; Comment prévenir la corruption ? &apos; .
The brochure is a practical guide to businesses facing attempted corruption .
Its suggestions to companies include establishing a code of conduct and briefing their employees about it .
The website of the NGO , Transparency International , lists examples of corporate initiatives against corruption : the Transparency International Business Principles for major international companies and the SME edition for small and medium-sized enterprises11 .
The Belgian Network of Transparency International also holds courses and can provide advice on combating corruption .
Another invaluable source of information is the Fighting Corruption through Collective Action Guide , available at the website of the World Bank .
Take action It is important not to stand back in the fight against corruption .
Do take action , both preventive and reactive .
Think about strategy for tackling corruption in your department or company .
What are your weak points ?
On what front do you run risks , and how do you think you might cope with delicate situations ?
So you should be able to make sound decisions , with sufficient time for reflection , and without having to meet a crisis situation head-on .
Your measures should depend on your company &apos;s size and the degree of its exposure to such risk countries or sectors .
If you control all areas of your small business , the risk is therefore smaller .
If you are already aware of corruption-related issues , you should also raise the awareness of your staff .
Ways of doing this include codes of conduct and transparent procurement and market procedures .
Other methods are to identify posts which entail corruption risks and screen candidates for these carefully .
Hold regular integrity courses with your staff .
Allocate and pay your staff an adequate salary , anticipating future trends .
You might draw up a checklist of risks of bribery inherent to your company &apos;s business , write a manual of best practices , a code of conduct , etc .
Another powerful tool against corruption is to provide systematic protection for people who report facts within your company .
The main NGO dealing with corruption is called - aptly enough - transparency International .
Corruption occurs behind closed doors .
That is why clear procedures and the principle of double-checking are important .
Rotation of the most exposed positions may also be set up .
Watch out Finally , ensure that the established procedures and your set rules of good management are followed .
If they are not implemented in practice , your efforts will soon become redundant .
If problems occur , seek help and advice via the established channels : your trade organization , your trade union , the Federation of Enterprises in Belgium ( FEB ) , the Chamber of Commerce , the ( police and judicial ) authorities , etc .
Please don &apos;t forget : your co-operation is very important to us .
The departments of government cannot act alone in the fight against corruption .
What is Belgium doing against corruption ?
At international level The internationalization of trade and the expansion of the European Union have led to growing realization that corruption is a phenomenon which needs to be tackled internationally .
That is why there is support for Community rules which adopt a cross-border approach to corruption .
This means that penalties are no longer limited to one ’ s own national officials and / or persons and companies , but also apply to corruption of foreign officials and / or persons and companies .
Belgian companies which are engaged on the international market must therefore be aware that corrupt behaviour will not be tolerated either in domestic or international trade .
They have to realize that they may be held criminally liable for corrupt practices abroad as well .
The main international initiatives and processes are summarized below .
The United Nations Convention against Corruption , of 31 October 2003 , came into force in December 2005 .
This is the first global instrument in the fight against corruption .
It includes provisions concerning preventive measures , the penalization of corruption , international co-operation and technical support .
The Convention enjoys broad support : more than 100 member-countries have ratified it , including Belgium .
The United Nations Global Compact brings together nearly 5000 companies and organizations from all over the world .
Their members undertake to apply principles in the fields of human rights , work , the environment and combating of corruption to their activities and strategies .
The members report annually on the implementation of these principles .
A Belgian network has recently been established .
The 1999 Council of Europe Criminal Law Convention on Corruption contains provisions on both active and passive corruption in the public and private sectors .
Belgium ratified this Convention in 2004 , and also belongs to GRECO ( the Group of States against Corruption ) , which monitors application of the Convention in the Member States .
The Council of Europe Civil Law Convention on Corruption , likewise of 1999 , deals with the civil aspects of corruption .
Belgium ratified this Convention in 2007 .
The 1997 OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions is very important to Belgium ’ s private sector .
The aim of the OECD Convention is to create a common framework and a level playing field for companies to compete in the countries which ratify the Convention .
The Convention focuses on active corruption .
It penalizes people who bribe a foreign official , including in countries which are not party to the Convention .
There is also a strict evaluation mechanism within the OECD , which checks the countries for implementation and enforcement of the Convention .
The OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises are recommendations aimed at companies with a view to socially responsible action .
They contain a number of voluntary principles and standards for responsible behaviour in business relations .
The European Union has passed two directives ( 2004 / 17 / EC and 2004 / 18 / EC ) on combating corruption and the consequences of corruption .
Businesses which are convicted of bribery can be debarred from participation in public invitations to tender in other countries .
A number of EU Member States have already set up blacklists in relation to public contracts .
Other international regulations and initiatives or foreign legislation may also be important to Belgian companies .
Noteworthy initiatives in this regard are the World Bank ’ s Collective Action initiative ( www.fightingcorruption.org ) , the 1996 WTO Agreement on Government Procurement ( GPA ) and the USA ’ s Foreign Corrupt Practices Act .
Belgian companies may be subject to the latter US legislation if , for example , they co-operate with an American company as part of a joint venture .
At national level Since the late 1990s , Belgium has paid increasing attention to its anti-corruption policy .
A number of national corruption scandals , and inadequate legal means of combating them , have forced Belgium to revise its penalties for bribery .
International pressure has also been brought to bear .
Hence Belgium has ratified the conventions at UN and EU levels , and signed and ratified those of the Council of Europe and OECD .
Of course , signing and ratifying such conventions are not window-dressing : they require Belgium to fulfil a number of obligations .
In the late 1990s Belgium passed the Law against Bribery .
It also introduced criminal liability of legal persons .
Since then , Belgium has had firm legislation against both public and private bribery .
It has created the opportunity to prosecute and convict legal as well as natural persons .
These two laws represented the first important steps in Belgium ’ s anti-corruption policy .
Belgium has its own , specialized anti-corruption department within the Federal Criminal Investigation Police .
This is the Central Office for the Repression of Corruption , answerable to the Directorate for Combating Economic and Financial Crime .
The Central Office is authorized to investigate , and support the investigation of , malpractices detrimental to the interests of the state .
This includes serious and complex misdemeanours involving corruption .
The Central Office also fulfils a pilot role in the context of combating criminal abuses and misconduct with regard to government contracts , subsidy laws , recognitions and licensing .
Its brief also extends to private corruption .
The Central Office monitors the phenomenon of corruption to gain the clearest possible picture of it .
The Belgian Federal Government also maintains regular contacts with counterpart foreign or international bodies , including OLAF , the European Commission &apos;s anti-fraud office .
In Belgium , the Office for Administrative Ethics and Deontology of the Federal Government Department of the Budget and Management Control implements integrity policy within the departments of the Federal Government .
This Office &apos;s task is preventive monitoring of the integrity of Federal Government departments .
The Office has now set up a framework of good practice for federal civil servants .
The primary purpose of this framework is to preserve and strengthen public trust in the proper functioning of the Federal Civil Service , by encouraging all civil servants to behave ethically and in accordance with good practice .
The private sector has made its own efforts in recent years .
Examples are the unremitting work of organizations such as the FEB , the Belgian Network of Transparency International and ICC Belgium to raise companies &apos; awareness of these problems .
These organizations fully support companies which wish to continue to work towards ethical enterprise in a climate of globalization .
There is also an inter-departmental working group in the Service for Criminal Policy , which exists to follow up and implement the recommendations of the OECD , GRECO and the UN concerning corruption .
The working group brings together the main partners in Belgian anti-corruption policy .
Furthermore , a Network of Expertise on Corruption has been set up under the auspices of the Board of Public Prosecutors-General .
It co-operates very closely with the Network of Expertise on Economic , Financial and Fiscal Crime , bringing together partners in corruption prosecution policy .
In any case , there is a need for information exchange and contacts between the preventive and reactive arms .
This should take place in a more structured , institutionalized way .
A bridge is also being built between the public and private levels .
The private sector should be made more aware of the misdemeanour of corruption , and all kinds of ethically unacceptable behaviour .
This is a role which the public sector should fulfil : hence this brochure .
This multi-disciplinary , integrated method of working against corruption is gradually beginning to bear fruit .
Thus the inter-departmental working group , mentioned above , has prompted the amendment of the laws on bribery .
Its members have each contributed their own expertise in preparing the new act , the Law of 11 May 2007 in Amendment of the Law against Bribery .
Gradually , the doors are opening for consultation between all policy , from federal to regional .
Belgian government departments and associations The following is a brief list of the main partners in anti-corruption policy .
Federal Government Department of Justice Links You can find further information on Belgian , European and international policy against corruption at the following websites .
Federal Government Department of Justice Federal Police Central Department on Combating Corruption Police on web Federal Department of the Budget , Bureau of Official Ethics and Good Practice Federal Department of Finance ICC Belgium Federation of Enterprises in Belgium Corporate governance Transparency International Transparency International Belgium World Bank Internet portal GRECO OECD UN corruption Code of Conduct for Members of the European Parliament with respect to financial interests and conflicts of interest Article 1 Guiding principles In exercising their duties , Members of the European Parliament : are guided by and observe the following general principles of conduct : disinterest , integrity , openness , diligence , honesty , accountability and respect for Parliament ’ s reputation , act solely in the public interest and refrain from obtaining or seeking to obtain any direct or indirect financial benefit or other reward .
Article 2 Main duties of Members In exercising their duties , Members of the European Parliament shall : not enter into any agreement to act or vote in the interest of any other legal or natural person that would compromise their voting freedom , as enshrined in Article 6 of the Act of 20 September 1976 concerning the election of the members of the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage and Article 2 of the Statute for Members of the European Parliament , not solicit , accept or receive any direct or indirect financial benefit or other reward in exchange for influencing , or voting on , legislation , motions for a resolution , written declarations or questions tabled in Parliament or any of its committees , and shall consciously seek to avoid any situation which might imply bribery or corruption .
Article 3 Conflicts of interest A conflict of interest exists where a Member of the European Parliament has a personal interest that could improperly influence the performance of his or her duties as a Member .
A conflict of interest does not exist where a Member benefits only as a member of the general public or of a broad class of persons .
Any Member who finds that he or she has a conflict of interest shall immediately take the necessary steps to address it , in accordance with the principles and provisions of this Code of Conduct .
If the Member is unable to resolve the conflict of interest , he or she shall report this to the President in writing .
In cases of ambiguity , the Member may seek advice in confidence from the Advisory Committee on the Conduct of Members , established under Article 7 .
Without prejudice to paragraph 2 , Members shall disclose , before speaking or voting in plenary or in one of Parliament ’ s bodies , or if proposed as a rapporteur , any actual or potential conflict of interest in relation to the matter under consideration , where such conflict is not evident from the information declared pursuant to Article 4 .
Such disclosure shall be made in writing or orally to the chair during the parliamentary proceedings in question .
Article 4 Declaration by Members For reasons of transparency , Members of the European Parliament shall be personally responsible for submitting a declaration of financial interests to the President by the end of the first part-session after elections to the European Parliament ( or within 30 days of taking up office with the Parliament in the course of a parliamentary term ) , in accordance with a form to be adopted by the Bureau pursuant to Article 9 .
They shall notify the President of any changes that have an influence on their declaration within 30 days of each change occurring .
The declaration of financial interests shall contain the following information , which shall be provided in a precise manner : the Member ’ s occupation ( s ) during the three-year period before he or she took up office with the Parliament , and his or her membership during that period of any boards or committees of companies , non- governmental organisations , associations or other bodies established in law , any salary which the Member receives for the exercise of a mandate in another parliament , any regular remunerated activity which the Member undertakes alongside the exercise of his or her office , whether as an employee or as a self-employed person , membership of any boards or committees of any companies , non- governmental organisations , associations or other bodies established in law , or any other relevant outside activity that the Member undertakes , whether the membership or activity in question is remunerated or unremunerated , any occasional remunerated outside activity ( including writing , lecturing or the provision of expert advice ) , if the total remuneration exceeds EUR 5 000 in a calendar year , any holding in any company or partnership , where there are potential public policy implications or where that holding gives the Member significant influence over the affairs of the body in question , any support , whether financial or in terms of staff or material , additional to that provided by Parliament and granted to the Member in connection with his or her political activities by third parties , whose identity shall be disclosed , any other financial interests which might influence the performance of the Member ’ s duties .
Any regular income Members receive in respect of each item declared in accordance with the first subparagraph shall be placed in one of the following categories : EUR 500 to EUR 1 000 a month ; EUR 1 001 to EUR 5 000 a month ; EUR 5 001 to EUR 10 000 a month ; more than EUR 10 000 a month .
Any other income Members receive in respect of each item declared in accordance with the first subparagraph shall be calculated on an annual basis , divided by twelve and placed in one of the categories set out in the second subparagraph .
The information provided to the President in line with this Article shall be published on Parliament ’ s website in an easily accessible manner .
Members may not be elected as office-holders of Parliament or of one of its bodies , be appointed as a rapporteur or participate in an official delegation , if they have not submitted their declaration of financial interests .
Article 5 Gifts or similar benefits Members of the European Parliament shall refrain from accepting , in the performance of their duties , any gifts or similar benefits , other than those with an approximate value of less than EUR 150 given in accordance with courtesy usage or those given to them in accordance with courtesy usage when they are representing Parliament in an official capacity .
Any gifts presented to Members , in accordance with paragraph 1 , when they are representing Parliament in an official capacity shall be handed over to the President and dealt with in accordance with implementing measures to be laid down by the Bureau pursuant to Article 9 .
The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to the reimbursement of travel , accommodation and subsistence expenses of Members , or to the direct payment of such expenses by third parties , when Members attend , pursuant to an invitation and in the performance of their duties , at any events organised by third parties .
The scope of this paragraph , in particular the rules designed to ensure transparency , shall be specified in the implementing measures to be laid down by the Bureau pursuant to Article 9 .
Article 6 Activities of former Members Former Members of the European Parliament who engage in professional lobbying or representational activities directly linked to the European Union decision-making process may not , throughout the period in which they engage in those activities , benefit from the facilities granted to former Members under the rules laid down by the Bureau to that effect 1 .
Article 7 Advisory Committee on the Conduct of Members An Advisory Committee on the Conduct of Members ( ‘ the Advisory Committee ’ ) is hereby established .
The Advisory Committee shall be composed of five members , appointed by the President at the beginning of his or her term of office from amongst the members of the bureaux and the coordinators of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs , taking due account of the Members ’ experience and of political balance .
Each member of the Advisory Committee shall serve as chair for six months on a rotating basis .
The President shall also , at the beginning of his or her term of office , nominate reserve members for the Advisory Committee , one for each political group not represented in the Advisory Committee .
In the event of an alleged breach of this Code of Conduct by a member of a political group not represented in the Advisory Committee , the relevant reserve member shall serve as a sixth full member of the Advisory Committee for the purposes of investigation of that alleged breach .
Upon request by a Member , the Advisory Committee shall give him or her , in confidence and within 30 calendar days , guidance on the interpretation and implementation of the provisions of this Code of Conduct .
The Member in question shall be entitled to rely on such guidance .
At the request of the President , the Advisory Committee shall also assess alleged breaches of this Code of Conduct and advise the President on possible action to be taken .
The Advisory Committee may , after consulting the President , seek advice from outside experts .
The Advisory Committee shall publish an annual report of its work .
Article 8 Procedure in the event of possible breaches of the Code of Conduct Where there is reason to think that a Member of the European Parliament may have breached this Code of Conduct , the President may refer the matter to the Advisory Committee .
The Advisory Committee shall examine the circumstances of the alleged breach , and may hear the Member concerned .
On the basis of the conclusions of its findings , it shall make a recommendation to the President on a possible decision .
If , taking into account that recommendation , the President concludes that the Member concerned has breached the Code of Conduct , he shall , after hearing the Member , adopt a reasoned decision laying down a penalty , which he shall notify to the Member .
The penalty may consist of one or more of the measures listed in Rule 153 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The internal appeal procedures defined in Rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure shall be open to the Member concerned .
After the expiry of the time-limits laid down in Rule 154 of the Rules of the Procedure , any penalty imposed on a Member shall be announced by the President in plenary and prominently published on Parliament ’ s website for the remainder of the parliamentary term .
Article 9 Implementation The Bureau shall lay down implementing measures for this Code of Conduct , including a monitoring procedure , and shall update the amounts referred to in Articles 4 and 5 , when necessary .
It may bring forward proposals for revision of this Code of Conduct .
Official Journal of the European Union COUNCIL DECISION 2008 / 852 / JHA of 24 October 2008 on a contact-point network against corruption THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION , Having regard to the Treaty on European Union , and in particular Article 29 , Article 30 ( 1 ) , Article 31 and Article 34 ( 2 ) ( c ) thereof , Having regard to the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany , Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament , Whereas : ( 1 ) Article 29 of the Treaty states that the objective of the Union to provide citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom , security and justice is to be achieved by preventing and combating crime , organised or otherwise , including corruption and fraud .
( 2 ) The European Union strategy for the beginning of the new millennium on the prevention and control of organised crime emphasises the need to develop a comprehensive EU policy against corruption .
( 3 ) In its Resolution of 14 April 2005 concerning a comprehensive EU policy against corruption , which refers to the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee of 28 May 2003 on a Comprehensive EU Policy against Corruption , the Council reaffirms the importance of the role and work of the Member States in developing a comprehensive , multi-faceted policy against corruption in both the public and private sectors , in partnership with all relevant players from civil society and business alike .
( 4 ) The European Council welcomed the development in the Hague Programme ( point 2.7 ) of a strategic concept with regard to cross-border organised crime and corruption at EU level and asked the Council and the Commission to develop this concept further and make it operational .
( 5 ) The heads and key representatives of EU Member States &apos; national police monitoring and inspection bodies and those of their anti-corruption agencies with a wider remit met in November 2004 in Vienna at the AGIS conference on the Enhancement of Operational Cooperation in Fighting Corruption in the European Union .
They emphasised the importance of further enhancing their cooperation , inter alia , through annual meetings , and welcomed the idea of a European anti-corruption network based upon existing structures .
In the wake of the Vienna conference these European Partners Against Corruption ( EPAC ) met in Budapest in November 2006 for their sixth annual meeting , where with an overwhelming majority , they confirmed their commitment to supporting the initiative on setting up a more formal anti-corruption network .
( 6 ) In order to build upon existing structures , the authorities and agencies to form part of the European anti-corruption network could include EPAC member organisations .
( 7 ) The enhancement of international cooperation is generally recognised as a key issue in the fight against corruption .
The fight against all forms of corruption should be improved by cooperating effectively , identifying opportunities , sharing good practices and developing high professional standards .
The establishment of an anti-corruption network at EU level is an important contribution to the improvement of such cooperation , HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS : Article 1 Objective In order to improve cooperation between authorities and agencies to prevent and combat corruption in Europe a network of contact points of the Member States of the European Union shall be set up ( hereinafter referred to as the ‘ network ’ ) .
The European Commission , Europol and Eurojust shall be fully associated with the activities of the Network .
Article 2 Composition of the network The network shall consist of authorities and agencies of the Member States of the European Union charged with preventing or combating corruption .
The members shall be designated by the Member States .
The Member States shall each designate at least one , but not more than three organisations .
The European Commission shall designate its representatives .
Within their respective competencies , Europol and Eurojust may participate in the activities of the Network .
Article 3 Tasks of the network 1 .
The network shall in particular have the following tasks : 1. it shall constitute a forum for the exchange throughout the EU of information on effective measures and experience in the prevention and combating of corruption ; 2. it shall facilitate the establishment and active maintenance of contacts between its members .
To these ends , inter alia , a list of contact points shall be kept up-to-date and a web site operated .
2 .
The members of the network shall , for the accomplishment of their tasks , meet at least once a year .
Article 4 Scope Police and judicial cooperation between the Member States shall be governed by the relevant rules .
The setting up of the network shall be without prejudice to such rules , and without prejudice to the role of CEPOL .
Article 5 Organisation of the network 1 .
The network shall organise itself , building upon existing informal collaboration between the EPAC .
2 .
The Member States and the European Commission shall bear all expenses of the members or representatives designated by them .
The same rule shall apply to Europol and Eurojust .
Article 6 Entry into force This Decision shall take effect on the day following that of its adoption .
Done at Luxembourg , 24 October 2008 .
For the Council The President M. ALLIOT-MARIE Protecting the EU ’ s financial interests - fight against fraud Since 1995 , a convention has been in place which seeks to protect , under criminal law , the financial interests of the EU and its taxpayers .
Over the years , the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ’ Financial Interests has been supplemented by a series of protocols .
ACT Council Act of 26 July 1995 drawing up the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ’ financial interests SUMMARY Since 1995 , a convention has been in place which seeks to protect , under criminal law , the financial interests of the EU and its taxpayers .
Over the years , the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ’ Financial Interests has been supplemented by a series of protocols .
WHAT DOES THE CONVENTION DO ?
The Convention and its protocols provide a harmonised legal definition of fraud require their signatories to adopt criminal penalties for fraud .
KEY POINTS EU countries must introduce effective , proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties to deal with fraud affecting the EU ’ s financial interests .
The Convention differentiates between fraud in regard to expenditure and revenue .
Examples of fraud in respect to expenditure include any intentional act or omission such as : the use or presentation of false , incorrect or incomplete statements or documents which has as its effect ; the misappropriation or wrongful retention of funds from the EU ’ s budget non-disclosure of information in violation of a specific obligation with the same effect ; or the misapplication of such funds for purposes other than those for which they were intended .
Examples of fraud in respect of revenue include any intentional act or omission such as : the use or presentation of false , incorrect or incomplete statements or documents , which has as its effect the illegal reduction of EU budget resources ; non-disclosure of information in violation of a specific obligation with the same effect ; or the misapplication of a legally obtained benefit ( for example , the misuse of legally obtained tax payments ) with the same effect .
In cases of serious fraud , these penalties must include custodial sentences that may give rise to extradition in certain cases .
The first Protocol to the Convention , adopted in 1996 , differentiates between ‘ active ’ * and ‘ passive ’ * corruption of public officials .
It also defines an ‘ official ’ ( both at national and EU levels ) and harmonises the penalties for corruption offences .
Liability of legal persons Each EU country must enact legislation to allow heads of businesses or any persons having power to take decisions or exercise control within a business ( i.e.
legal persons ) to be declared criminally liable .
The Second Protocol , adopted in 1997 , further clarified the Convention regarding the issues of the liability of legal persons , confiscation and money laundering .
National courts In 1996 , a Protocol conferring an interpretative jurisdiction on the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) was adopted .
This protocol allows national courts , when in doubt as to how to interpret the Convention and its Protocols , to petition the Court of Justice of the European Union for preliminary rulings .
Each EU country must take the necessary measures to establish its jurisdiction over the offences it has established in accordance with its obligations under the convention .
Cases of fraud involving two or more countries If a fraud constitutes a criminal offence and concerns at least two EU countries , those countries must cooperate effectively in the investigation , the prosecution and the enforcement of the penalties imposed by means , for example , of mutual legal assistance , extradition , transfer of proceedings or enforcement of sentences passed in another EU country .
Disputes between EU countries Where disputes arise as to the interpretation or application of the Convention , the case must first be examined by the Council .
If the Council does not find a solution within 6 months , a party to the dispute may petition the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The Court of Justice also has jurisdiction over disputes between EU countries and the European Commission .
SINCE WHEN HAS THE CONVENTION APPLIED ?
The Convention entered into force on 17 October 2002 , along with its first protocol and the protocol on its interpretation by the Court of Justice .
The second protocol entered into force on 19 May 2009 .
The convention and its protocols are open for signature by any country that joins the EU .
For more information , see the European Anti-Fraud Office .
KEY TERMS Active corruption : an offence committed by a public official who gives or promises a bribe .
Passive corruption : an offence committed by an official who receives a bribe .
RELATED ACTS Council Act of 27 September 1996 drawing up a Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests OJ C 313 , 23.10.1996 , pp .
1-10 .
Council Act of 29 November 1996 drawing up , on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , the Protocol on the interpretation , by way of preliminary rulings , by the Court of Justice of the European Communities of the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ’ financial interests OJ C 151 , 20.5.1997 , pp .
1-14 Council Act of 19 June 1997 drawing up the Second Protocol of the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ’ financial interests OJ C 221 , 19.7.1997 , pp .
11-22 Council Decision 2008 / 40 / JHA of 6 December 2007 concerning the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention , drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , on the protection of the European Communities ’ financial interests , the Protocol of 27 September 1996 , the Protocol of 29 November 1996 and the Second Protocol of 19 June 1997 OJ L 9 , 12.1.2008 , pp .
23-24. last update 24.08.2015 5 .
BUILDING UP AN ANTI-CORRUPTION CULTURE IN THE EU INSTITUTIONS Tackling corruption and fraud within the EU institutions and bodies has become an absolute priority for the EU in the last years .
The crisis triggered by the Commission &apos;s resignation in March 1999 revealed the necessity to set up more effective measures for the protection of the integrity of the European Public Administration .
In order to improve the legal framework in this field , the Commission has defined various initiatives in its overall strategy for the protection of the Community financial interests of 2000 , its action plan 2001-2003 , and more recently , its evaluation report on the OLAF activities .
Based upon a thorough scrutiny of existing rules and practices , several documents pointed out the weakness of the legal framework , and especially the fact that no investigation on alleged cases of corruption or fraud could be carried out within the EU institutions .
See Special Report of the Court of Auditors on the Commission &apos;s services specifically involved in the fight against fraud , notably UCLAF ( OJ C 230 , 22 / 7 / 1998 ) .
See Committee of Independent Experts , report of 15 March 1999 on fraud , mismanagement and favoritism in the European Commission , followed by a second report , dated 10 September 1999 , on the reform of the Commission , analysis of practices in force and proposals to remedy mismanagement , irregularities and fraud .
Communication on the fight against fraud , for an overall strategic approach COM ( 2000 ) 358 final and Communication on the fight against fraud , Action plan 2001-2003 COM ( 2001 ) 254 final .
Created in 1999 as an independent administrative body OLAF is entrusted to investigate cases of corruption , fraud and other serious professional misconduct affecting EC budget within all EU institutions and bodies ( internal investigations ) .
The interinstitutional agreement of May 1999 extended further the scope of its investigation power to all activities affecting Community interests against irregular conduct liable to give rise to administrative or criminal proceedings of the EC public servants .
The Cologne European Council asked all the institutions and bodies to join the interinstitutional agreement so that the investigations would be carried out under equivalent conditions in all of them .
Interinstitutional agreement between the Commission , the Council and the Parliament concerning internal investigations carried out by the Office ( OJ L 136 , 31 / 5 / 1999 , p . 15 ) and model Decision annexed .
According to Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 and Council Regulation ( Euratom ) No 1074 / 1999 ( OJ L 136 , 31 / 5 / 1999 , p . 1 and 8 ) , the purpose of OLAF &apos;s investigations is fighting fraud , corruption and any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the European Community &quot; and &quot; investigating to that end serious matters relating to the discharge of professional duties such as to constitute a dereliction of the obligations of officials and other servants of the Communities liable to result in disciplinary or , as the case may be , criminal proceedings , or an equivalent failure to discharge obligations on the part of members ... or members of the staff of institutions , bodies , offices or agencies not subject to the Staff Regulations ... &quot; .
In order to assure a better protection of the European Public Administration integrity all the institutions and bodies should accede to interinstitutional agreement of May 1999 and adopt an internal decision in line with the model decision annexed to the interinstitutional agreement .
See recommendation n ° 1 of the Commission report , Evaluation of the activities of the European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) , COM ( 2003 ) 154 .
OLAF acts principally on the basis of referral of cases and using information supplied by the members and staff of the institutions fulfilling their duty of loyalty .
In this respect , the Commission recommends that OLAF develop practices to secure compliance with and the standardised application of information procedures to institutions and bodies concerned and information procedures to persons involved in the investigations .
The duty to communicate cases of fraud or corruption is laid down in the regulation 1073 / 1999 .
See recommendation n ° 16 of the Commission report , Evaluation of the activities of the European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
The cooperation between OLAF and other EU institutions and bodies as well as the authorities specialising in financial irregularities has also been designed as an important issue for combating corruption and fraud within EU institutions .
See Commission report , Evaluation of the activities of the European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) Further to its White Paper on Reform , the Commission has drafted a practical guide for sound financial management describing standards of conduct , with reference to the fundamental ethical obligations provided in the Staff Regulations , in particular the duties of integrity , loyalty and impartiality .
The Commission has also introduced internal measures with a view to promoting accountability and preventing corrupt practices within the Commission such as the Decision of 4 April 2002 on raising concerns about serious wrongdoings , Codes of Conduct for Commissioners and Commission staff , standards for internal control within the Commission &apos;s services , a Guide to testing for vulnerability to fraud or new rules on job rotation for sensitive posts .
White Paper on Reforming the Commission of 1 March 2000 , COM ( 2000 ) 200 / 2 .
See Action 92 , For sound project management , Practical guide .
The draft is to be submitted for approval by the full Commission .
In the framework of the reform , the Commission proposes to include rules applying to staff of all EU institutions on raising concerns about serious wrongdoings in the future Staff Regulations , which are presently under discussion in the Council .
Code of good administrative behaviour for staff of the European Commission in their relations with the public With the creation of the Investigation and Disciplinary Office ( IDOC ) , the Commission has set up a system , which better addresses corruption or generally conflict of interest situations from a disciplinary point of view .
The cooperation between IDOC and OLAF should be considered as essential issue in assuring an efficient and uniform protection of the integrity of the European Public Administration .
Taking into account their complementary missions in the field of administrative investigation , a memorandum of understanding should organise their relations and both guarantee appropriate follow-up of the OLAF enquiries when requiring disciplinary sanctions and avoid overlapping in their competencies .
THE OLAF HAS BROADER INTERNAL POWER TO CARRY OUT INVESTIGATIONS , EVEN INTO MEMBERS OR PERSONNEL NOT SUBJECT TO THE STAFF REGULATIONS , WHICH IT CAN EXERCISE IN ALL INSTITUTIONS AND BODIES .
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE OLAF EXPERTISE IN THE FIGHT AGAINST BEHAVIOUR INVOLVING SERIOUS FORMS OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL OFFENCES , THIS MEMORANDUM SHOULD MAKE THE PRACTICAL BREAKDOWN OF TASKS BETWEEN OLAF AND DISCIPLINARY BODIES MORE TRANSPARENT .
SEE RECOMMENDATION 8 OF THE COMMISSION EVALUATION REPORT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EUROPEAN ANTI-FRAUD OFFICE .
6 .
PREVENTING CORRUPTION - THE SINGLE MARKET AND OTHER INTERNAL POLICIES The Commission believes that future initiatives should focus on preventive measures with a view to reducing opportunities for corrupt behaviour by avoiding conflicts of interest and introducing systematic checks and controls .
This was also the approach in the Commission &apos;s first Communication on corruption .
In response to the Communication , the European Parliament called upon the Commission to exercise its power in different areas such as tax deductibility , blacklisting regarding public procurement procedures , financial transactions , training programmes , fraud within the EU institutions , money laundering and external aid and assistance .
a ) Raising integrity in the public sector On 7 November 2000 , EU Ministers in charge of Civil Service and Public Administration adopted in Strasbourg a resolution on quality and benchmarking of public services in the European Union .
The cornerstone of this resolution is the setting-up of a self-assessment framework of total quality management in public services ( so-called &quot; Cadre d &apos;Auto-évaluation des Fonctions publiques &quot; or Common Assessment Framework , CAF ) .
The CAF is supposed to serve both as a means of communication and as a tool for benchmarking among EU Member States &apos; public administrations with a view to raising integrity , accountability and transparency in public institutions At the request of Ministers , Directors-general of Civil Service and Public Administrations have developed a work programme for the &quot; innovative public services group &quot; aimed at improving the quality and efficiency of administrations on a continuous basis .
The Commission therefore recommends engaging a comprehensive dialogue within the EU on minimum standards and benchmarks in administrative integrity and good governance on the basis of the Strasbourg Resolution , essential to prevent and to combat effectively organised and transborder corruption .
b ) Tax Deductibility of bribes Further to a recommendation of the OECD of 1996 and the Commission &apos;s 1997 Communication , all EU Member States that still allowed or tolerated the tax deductibility of bribes paid to foreign public officials have amended their legislation with a view to banning this possibility .
c ) Public Procurement Public procurement represents about 15 % of the GDP in the EU .
The Community directives on public procurement ensure transparency and non-discriminatory access to procurement opportunities .
The prevention of fraud , corruption and collusion between the tenderers and contracting authorities is taken into consideration in the Community system .
Collusive behaviour between companies participating in a tender moreover may constitute a direct infringement of the prohibition laid down in article 81 of the EC Treaty .
In the aforesaid Millennium Strategy , the Council has called on Member States and the European Commission to ensure that the applicable legislation provides for the possibility that an applicant in a public tender procedure who has committed offences connected with organised crime can be excluded from the participation in tender procedures conducted by Member States and the Community ; specific provisions relating to the role of the Commission both in administrative co-operation and the setting up of black-lists , should be drawn up to ensure that these commitments can be carried out , while ensuring conformity with the relevant rules relating to data protection .
In its draft amendment of the public procurement directives , submitted in May 2000 , the Commission inserted an obligation to exclude any tenderer who has been convicted by definitive judgement for corruption , fraud or participation in the activities of a criminal organisation .
Article 45 of the modified proposal for a directive provides for a possibility for a contracting authority to ask for the cooperation of the competent authorities of another Member State when they need to obtain information concerning the personal situation of the candidates or tenderers concerned .
The authority contacted in another Member State is obliged to cooperate upon request .
Both the Council and the European Parliament in their first reading of the proposed directive have supported the amendments to article 45 .
Therefore no further legislative proposal is needed in order to start implementing article 45 of the proposed directive .
The Commission will reassess this issue in the light of the application of the new rules .
d ) Raising Integrity in the private sector i .
Protection of vulnerable professions against influences of crime An open and fruitful dialogue has started with representatives of the legal professions , accountants and auditors , in order to identify possible gaps or inconsistencies , develop basic ethical principles at EU level and strike the right balance between professional secrecy and public interest .
As a result , a Charter of the European professional associations in support of the fight against crime was signed on 27 July 1999 .
The European professional associations ( notaries , lawyers , accountants , auditors and tax consultants ) encourage their Member Associations to adopt standards within the existing or future Codes of conduct to protect the professionals they represent from being involved in fraud , corruption and money laundering or from being exploited by organised crime .
The Commission invites the signatories of the Charter of the European professional associations in support of the fight against crime to further strengthen their self-regulatory regimes .
This with a view to reducing the risk that representatives of these professions should sacrifice their professional integrity as a result of acts performed by criminals for illicit purposes .
ii .
Strengthening corporate social responsibility Companies and their representatives are usually both offenders of corrupt practices ( supply side of corruption ) and victims ( either as an unselected bidder , because a contract was awarded to a competitor using bribes to influence the decision to their favour or as victims where an employee has acted against the company &apos;s interests because he or she was bribed by a competing company ) .
This double-faced role of the private sector has to be addressed through promoting corporate responsibility and liability on the basis of international standards and principles , including the development and implementation of modern accounting standards , adoption of adequate internal audit schemes , codes of conduct and their implementation , and the establishment of channels for communication Further to the adoption of the 1997 OECD Convention on bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions , it is a punishable offence ( including corporate liability ) in all state parties &apos; jurisdictions ( including all EU Member States ) to bribe a foreign public official of any jurisdiction world-wide .
Still , recent studies ( cf .
Bribe Payers &apos; Index of Transparency International ) seem to indicate that only few companies are aware of this international instrument and national implementing legislation .
Awareness raising within the entire private sector should be improved with a view to sensitising companies to the damaging consequences that corrupt practices might have on companies and their reputation and thus preventing corruption .
Bribery is a hidden phenomenon because it is built on &quot; the pact of silence &quot; between briber and bribee .
Companies should therefore have clear rules on &quot; whistleblowing &quot; ( i.e.
procedures to follow if an employee becomes aware of corrupt behaviour inside the company ) .
This should include training and monitoring of these rules with a view to making it clear that corruption is unacceptable , and encouraging employees to expose it .
The Commission intends to further stimulate the necessary dialogue in this area between the public and the private sector through initiatives such as the EU Forum on the prevention of organised crime .
e ) Accounting standards and statutory audit In the area of accounting and auditing , major recent scandals have led to an acceleration of decision-making with a view to creating an efficient and competitive EU capital market by 2005 , which is the objective of the EU &apos;s &quot; Financial Services Action Plan &quot; .
In June 2002 , the EU adopted a regulation requiring listed companies , including banks and insurance companies , to prepare their consolidated accounts in accordance with International Accounting Standards ( IAS ) from 2005 onwards .
This will ensure that company accounts throughout the EU are more reliable , transparent and more easily comparable .
This will also facilitate the detection of fraud and corruption .
Now , the Commission has to ensure proper implementation , harmonised interpretation and enforcement of the IAS .
In May 2002 , the Commission has issued Recommendations on the independence of the statutory auditor .
The recommendations contain a set of demanding principles .
They recommend in particular that auditors should be prohibited from carrying out a statutory audit if they have any relationship with the client that might compromise their independence .
Although recommendations are not legally binding , they will serve as a clear benchmark of best practice .
The Commission will monitor implementation and will consider , in the light of practical application , whether binding EU legislation may be required .
At present there are no agreed auditing standards in the EU .
Although there is general agreement that any initiative in this field should be based on the International Standards on Auditing ( ISA ) , it is still unclear how all statutory audits in the EU will be carried out on this basis .
There is also no EU mechanism to deal with supervision of the audit profession .
Statutory audit will be subject of a forthcoming communication of the Commission outlining future policy priorities in this field .
f ) Fighting corruption in bodies of special nature in-between the public and the private sector In recent years , Western Europe has been hit by a wave of political corruption scandals .
They have highlighted that there may be secret ( triangular ) links between public office holders , the business world and representatives of social partners and other interest groups , somewhat in-between the public and the private sector , such as political parties , trade unions and employers &apos; associations , or foundations , etc .
Very often undeclared donations are given to these semi-public entities of special nature , often circumventing legal obligations , to influence important political or economic decisions or to create a &quot; good climate &quot; between the public and the private sector .
The secret nature of these links usually makes it very difficult to prove concrete quid-pro-quo bribe giving and bribe taking in a criminal law sense and sometimes the behaviour is not punishable at all .
In particular , a handful of high-profile cases disclosed by the media has highlighted this phenomenon .
This trend can be broadly linked to the structure and rules of the financing of social partners and other interest groups within the countries concerned .
This growth in political scandals linked to the financing of these entities is due in part to the following factors : growing bureaucratisation of organisations , increasing costs of campaign expenditures , a change in the nature of political competition through greater use of the media or the declining role of the state as a public service provider and competition for state contracts .
As such , a major review is needed that assesses and analyses the nature of these links so as to expose the problem and address it in the future .
In fact , only utmost transparency in financing of social partners and interest groups , election spending and certain restrictions on business activities of representatives of these entities can ensure that they act free of ( potential ) conflicts of interests .
The Commission is very concerned about this development and suggests the EU-wide adoption of clear and transparent rules on the financing of these entities of special nature and an increasing role of the civil society .
On the basis of a study assessing the situation of political corruption and financing of social partner entities and other interest groups in Europe , the Commission will prepare and submit proposals to the European Parliament and to the Council containing standards and best practices for transparent funding of these entities , election spending and avoiding of conflicts of interest .
7 .
EXTERNAL ASPECTS The forthcoming accession of new EU Members States and a stronger coherence between internal and external EU policy as suggested in the Tampere conclusions or in the recent &quot; Communication on Wider Europe - Neighbourhood &quot; , with a particular focus on Russia , Western NIS , South-East Europe and the Mediterranean Partners already pave the way for future ( concentrated ) EU initiatives in the fight against corruption .
a ) Encouraging anti-corruption policies in the acceding , candidate and other third countries on the basis of 10 general principles ( cf .
attached to this document ) In the EU acceding and candidate countries the fight against corruption has become much more prominent during recent years , particularly driven by the prospect of accession .
Although enormous progress has already been achieved and the majority of these countries have adopted national anti-corruption strategies , corruption , and other economic crimes remain prevalent as highlighted by the Commission in its regular progress reports on accession .
Moreover , overlapping jurisdictions and lack of co-ordination endanger the achievements .
Although capacity building in the fight against corruption was addressed during the accession negotiations and the PHARE programme has supported several anti-corruption projects , the Commission proposes that efforts should be intensified to ensure that its overall anti-corruption strategy is fully extended to acceding and candidate countries .
Although all acceding and candidate countries have signed at least one of the relevant international anti-corruption instruments , such as the Criminal and the Civil Law Conventions of the Council of Europe or the OECD Convention on bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions , the biggest challenge remains their effective implementation .
The Commission has frequently recommended improved co-ordination between different authorities responsible for fighting corruption and further campaigns to raise public awareness in order to prevent corruption .
The establishment of a single anti-corruption unit or a single co-ordinating body would represent a significant step forward in this respect .
The capacity of public administration structures and the judiciary to perform their tasks effectively is an overarching concern of the Commission .
This holds in particular for the implementation of legal obligations derived from the acquis .
In order to render the fight against corruption effective , the enhanced integrity , transparency and accountability of administrations and the promotion of good governance constitute essential elements of a comprehensive preventative policy .
The Commission favours , on the basis of ten general principles ( cf .
attached to this document ) and the needs of each particular country , a comprehensive effort of the Phare programme in the remaining time-frame prior to accession with a view to further strengthening relevant administrative capacities ( judiciary , police , customs , public procurement ) in the candidate countries .
The Commission considers that training and specialisation in this field should be improved in order to provide the national bodies in all relevant areas such as judiciary , prosecution , law enforcement , customs and police with appropriate and well-trained staff .
Above all the most comprehensive and central recommendation in this context is an enhanced alignment of national legislation with the acquis and other international instruments to ensure further development .
The Commission fully recognises that the effectiveness of national anti-corruption policies can be only assessed at least one year after their implementation .
In other countries , such as the states of the Western Balkans , corruption remains a widespread phenomenon .
A general strengthening of the national institution is a key element of the Stabilisation and Association process in the Western Balkan countries .
Stronger and more effective institutions will have a better capacity to resist corruption .
Addressing corruption is an important part of regional and country strategies set up in the context of the CARDS assistance programme with regard to , for example , fighting organised crime .
In general , progress in eliminating corruption is essential if the countries of the western Balkans are to advance further on their way towards European integration .
In December 2002 , the Copenhagen European Council confirmed that the Union should take the opportunity offered by enlargement to enhance relations with its neighbours , Russia , Ukraine , Moldova , Belarus and the Mediterranean countries , to avoid drawing new dividing lines in Europe and to promote stability and prosperity within and beyond the new borders of the Union .
Within the new Neighbourhood Policy , it is foreseen to intensify cooperation to prevent and combat common security threats , including corruption .
The EU will explore possibilities to work more closely with the neighbouring countries on judicial and police cooperation and the development of mutual legal assistance .
These countries need to attract foreign investment in order to boost economic performance .
This provides strong indirect incentives to reduce levels of corruption , and politicians have increasingly shown awareness of this fact .
b ) Cooperation agreements and foreign aid programmes The promotion of human rights , the consolidation of democratic principles and the rule of law have become key objectives of the foreign and development policy of the EU .
They have been integrated as &quot; essential elements &quot; in the different co-operation agreements with developing countries and are part of the regular political dialogue with partner countries .
The ACP-EU Partnership Agreement signed in Cotonou the 23 June 2000 between the EU and 77 African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries goes one step further by explicitly addressing the issues of good governance ( as &quot; fundamental element &quot; ) and corruption .
The ACP and EU agreed on a definition of good-governance that includes the fight against corruption .
These areas are also an important subject for political dialogue .
The parties have agreed that , when the Community is a significant partner in terms of financial support , serious cases of corruption , including acts of bribery leading to such corruption , can give rise to a consultation procedure .
If the measures to remedy the situation are not taken , the suspension of the co-operation can be decided as a measure of last resort .
Good governance is the transparent and accountable management of human , natural , economic and financial resources for the purpose of equitable and sustainable development .
It entails clear decision-making procedures at the level of public authorities , transparent and accountable institutions , the primacy of the rule of law in the management of resources and capacity building for elaborating and implementing measures aiming in particular to preventing and combating corruption The Cotonou Agreement does not define the &quot; serious cases of corruption &quot; that can lead to the suspension of the co-operation .
In the framework of the permanent political dialogue that covers governance-related issues , the parties examine the changes underway and the continuity of the progresses achieved .
This regular assessment takes into account each country &apos;s economic , social , cultural and historical context .
The consultation procedure does not apply exclusively or necessarily when EC funds are involved but more generally when corruption constitutes an obstacle to the country &apos;s development .
Consultations have taken place in one case , when the European Union were deeply preoccupied by the lack of transparency in the public accounting system and by the risks of serious corruption in particular in the management of natural resources and the exploitation of monopolies in a partner country .
The Commission &apos;s Manual of Instructions on Contracts for works , supplies and services concluded for the purposes of Community co-operation with third countries contains provisions that apply to cases of corrupt practices detected in the context of a particular project .
These provisions do not necessarily involve the suspension of the application of the Co-operation framework with the country concerned .
They affect in general , at least at a first stage , EC disbursements for supporting this particular project .
Section 7 of the Manual provides for the possibility to &quot; suspend or cancel project financing if corrupt practices of any kind are discovered at any stage of the award process and if the contracting authority fails to take all appropriate measures to remedy the situation .
For the purposes of this provision , &apos; corrupt practices &apos; are the offer of a bribe , gift , gratuity or commission to any person as an inducement or reward for performing or refraining from any act relating to the award of a contract or implementation of a contract already concluded with the contracting authority . &quot;
In order to implement this new policy , the Commission is currently reviewing its framework and specific financing agreements with beneficiary states as well as its tender documents and contracts with a view to inserting standard clauses clarifying that the Commission may cancel financing and making the beneficiary state responsible for taking concrete actions in cases of corruption .
More recently ( December 2001 , January 2002 ) agreements were concluded with Algeria and Lebanon containing new chapters dedicated to cooperation in the Justice and Home Affairs area .
They include a specific article on the fight against corruption and refer to existing international legal instruments and commit the parties to take concrete measures against corruption and grant mutual legal assistance in criminal enquiries .
c ) EU Trade Policy and Officially Supported Export Credits Recent studies examining the connection between the openness of a country and good governance on the one hand , and the degree of corruption on the other hand , suggest that the best corruption prevention strategy seems to be a high investment in institution-building ( &quot; good governance &quot; ) , well-paid civil servants and participation in free trade and provision of open markets : the more open a country is , the less prone will it be to corruption .
By increasing uncertainty and the costs of transactions , corruption hampers international trade and reduces investment and therefore growth .
Open , transparent and competitive market conditions locally and at the international level can reduce corruption .
The EU , through the Commission , has consistently sought transparency as an essential element in international trade .
In this context , it has always recognised the need for increased transparency in government procurement as one of its highest priorities .
The EC promotes the extension to other WTO Parties of the Agreement on Government Procurement , which contains provisions of enhanced transparency and ensures fair competition in international procurement .
The EC is also committed to engage actively in the envisaged negotiations for a multilateral agreement on transparency in government procurement as agreed in the Doha WTO 4th Ministerial Conference .
Its proposals in other rule making areas of the WTO Doha agenda to improve the transparency and predictability of the multilateral systems will , if implemented , also improve levels of integrity .
Concerning officially supported export credits , the Commission invites Member States to monitor concrete implementation of anti-corruption clauses in the rules applied by relevant national agencies and in line with the OECD &quot; Action Statement &quot; of December 2000 .
8 .
CONCLUSIONS In conclusion , the future EU policy on corruption should consist of the following core elements : * A strong political commitment against all forms of corruption should come from the highest level of EU institutions .
* The implementation of existing anti-corruption instruments should be closely monitored and strengthened for the time being through the adhesion of the European Community to one or both Conventions on Corruption of the Council of Europe and the participation in its monitoring mechanism GRECO .
* EU Member States should develop and improve investigative tools and allocate more specialised staff to the fight against corruption .
* Member States and EU institutions and bodies should enhance efforts to combat corruption damaging the financial interests of the European Community .
* Common integrity standards in public administrations across the EU such as the Common Assessment Framework of EU Heads of Civil Service and Public Administration should be further developed at EU level .
* Member States and the Commission should support the private sector in its efforts to raise integrity and corporate responsibility .
* The fight against political corruption and illicit financing of social partner entities and other interest groups needs to be strengthened at EU and Member States level .
* In their permanent dialogue with acceding , candidate and other third countries , the Member States and the Commission should systematically include corruption-related issues and further assist these countries in their efforts to set-up and implement national anti-corruption policies on the basis of the attached ten general principles .
* The EU should continue making the fight against corruption an integral part of its external and trade police .
ANNEX TEN PRINCIPLES FOR IMPROVING THE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION IN ACCEDING , CANDIDATE AND OTHER THIRD COUNTRIES 1 To ensure credibility , a clear stance against corruption is essential from leaders and decision-makers .
Bearing in mind that no universally applicable recipes exist , national anti-corruption strategies or programmes , covering both preventive and repressive measures , should be drawn up and implemented .
These strategies should be subject to broad consultation at all levels .
2 Current and future EU Members shall fully align with the EU acquis and ratify and implement all main international anti-corruption instruments they are party to ( UN , Council of Europe and OECD Conventions ) .
Third countries should sign and ratify as well as implement relevant international anti-corruption instruments .
3 Anti-corruption laws are important , but more important is their implementation by competent and visible anti-corruption bodies ( i.e.
well trained and specialised services such as anti-corruption prosecutors ) .
Targeted investigative techniques , statistics and indicators should be developed .
The role of law enforcement bodies should be strengthened concerning not only corruption but also fraud , tax offences and money laundering .
4 Access to public office must be open to every citizen .
Recruitment and promotion should be regulated by objective and merit-based criteria .
Salaries and social rights must be adequate .
Civil servants should be required to disclose their assets .
Sensitive posts should be subject to rotation .
5 Integrity , accountability and transparency in public administration ( judiciary , police , customs , tax administration , health sector , public procurement ) should be raised through employing quality management tools and auditing and monitoring standards , such as the Common Assessment Framework of EU Heads of Public Administrations and the Strasbourg Resolution .
Increased transparency is important in view of developing confidence between the citizens and public administration .
6 Codes of conduct in the public sector should be established and monitored .
7 Clear rules should be established in both the public and private sector on whistle blowing ( given that corruption is an offence without direct victims who could witness and report it ) and reporting .
8 Public intolerance of corruption should be increased , through awareness-raising campaigns in the media and training .
The central message must be that corruption is not a tolerable phenomenon , but a criminal offence .
Civil society has an important role to play in preventing and fighting the problem .
9 Clear and transparent rules on party financing , and external financial control of political parties , should be introduced to avoid covert links between politicians and ( illicit ) business interests .
Political parties evidently have strong influence on decision-makers , but are often immune to anti-bribery laws .
10 Incentives should be developed for the private sector to refrain from corrupt practices such as codes of conduct or &quot; white lists &quot; for integer companies.Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee - On a comprehensive EU policy against corruption / * COM / 2003 / 0317 final * / COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE COUNCIL , THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE - ON A COMPREHENSIVE EU POLICY AGAINST CORRUPTION 1 .
INTRODUCTION Art .
29 of the Treaty on European Union lists the prevention and combating of corruption , organised or otherwise , as one objective enabling the creation and safeguarding of a European area of freedom , security and justice through closer judicial , police and customs cooperation and , where necessary , approximation of criminal law .
Going beyond the area of pure law enforcement , the Council in its 1997 Action Plan against organised crime had already advocated a comprehensive policy against corruption , primarily focussing on preventive measures and taking into account the work carried out also in other international fora .
In particular , Member States , the Council and the Commission had been invited to also tackle all aspects linked with the proper functioning of the internal market and other internal policies , as well as external assistance and cooperation .
Responding to this political guideline , the Commission put forward in the same year a Communication to the European Parliament and to the Council suggesting a range of measures ( banning of tax deductibility of bribes , rules on public procurement procedures , introduction of accounting and auditing standards , blacklisting of corrupt companies and measures in the Community &apos;s external aid and assistance scheme ) with a view to formulating an EU strategy on corruption both within and outside its borders .
Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on a Union policy against corruption , adopted by the Commission on 21 May 1997 COM ( 97 ) 192 final .
Focussing again on the area of judicial cooperation in criminal law matters , the 1998 Council Vienna Action Plan identified corruption as one of those criminal behaviours in the field of organised crime where prioritised action was deemed necessary by elaborating and adopting measures establishing minimum rules relating to the constituent elements of this offence and penalties .
Action plan of the Council and the Commission on how best to implement the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam on an area of freedom , security and justice , adopted by the Council on 3 December 1998 ; OJ C of 23 / 01 / 1999 N ° 19 / 1 .
At the 1999 Tampere European Council , EU Heads of State or Government endorsed this recommendation by identifying corruption , in the context of financial crime , as one of the sectors of particular relevance where common definitions , incriminations and sanctions should be agreed upon .
Finally , in line with the 1998 Action Plan and the Tampere Conclusions , the so-called Millennium Strategy on the Prevention and Control of Organised Crime of March 2000 reiterated the need for instruments aimed at the approximation of national legislation and developing a more general ( i.e.
multi-disciplinary ) EU policy towards corruption , taking into account as appropriate work being carried out in international organisations .
Furthermore , the same document urged those Member States , which had not yet ratified the relevant EU and Council of Europe anti-corruption legal instruments to ensure speedy ratification within a clear timeframe .
The prevention and control of organised crime - a European Union strategy for the beginning of the new millennium adopted by the Council on 27 March 2000 .
Since then the fight against corruption has gained further momentum at national , EU and international level and important EU and international instruments have been adopted .
Concerning EU instruments , the EU Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests ( PIF-Convention ) and its first protocol entered into force on 17 October 2002 ; the second protocol to the PIF-Convention and the EU Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of the EU Member States are still in the ratification process .
Also with regard to the protection of the Communities &apos; financial interests , the Commission has been addressing in-house corruption by establishing a European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) entrusted with interinstitutional investigative powers .
On the basis of article 280 TEC , which combines measures to prevent and to combat fraud detrimental to the EC budget , an overall strategy was adopted .
This strategy defines as a challenge within the Commission four-axed policy document , a detailed interinstitutional approach to prevent and combat corruption .
With respect to OLAF internal investigations , corruption covers the professional misconduct of EU officials in relation with the exercise of their duties liable to result in disciplinary or criminal proceedings .
The European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) has recently been subject to an in-depth evaluation report of the Commission , notably with respect to the implementation of the objectives set out in the above mentioned strategy .
Having a comprehensive approach on tackling corruption , the present communication follows a coherent approach together with the new initiatives on the protection of the Communities &apos; financial interests announced by this evaluation report .
The OECD Convention on combating bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions and the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe are already in force , the latter still lacking ratification instruments of most EU Member States .
The Convention was signed on 21 / 11 / 1997 and entered into force on 15 / 02 / 1999 .
The full text , details on ratification and implementing legislation and evaluation reports are available .
The Convention was signed on 27 / 01 / 1999 and entered into force on 01 / 07 / 2002 .
The full text , details on ratification and implementing legislation and evaluation reports are available .
In 2000 , the UN General Assembly decided to mandate an Ad-Hoc Committee with the elaboration of an international legal instrument against corruption , the future UN Convention against corruption .
If agreed , this will have far-reaching implications for the world-wide fight against corruption .
The EU has adopted three common positions on the basis of article 34 of the Treaty on European Union .
The Commission has substantially contributed to the common positions and was authorised by the Council to negotiate those provisions of the draft Convention relating to Community competencies .
Relevant documents of the Ad Hoc Committee for the negotiations of a United Nations Convention against Corruption are available under : In the aforesaid recommendations , the EU Council repeatedly emphasised the need to take into account the activities of other international fora devoted to the fight against corruption .
Bearing in mind this advice and with the conviction that duplicating similar activities can bind unnecessary resources and therefore even be counterproductive , the Commission holds the view that , at this stage of policy development , mainly those measures should be strengthened and supported at EU level , which are not already substantively covered , or not with the same degree of mandatory character as EU instruments , by international organisations .
This goes in particular for initiatives of the United Nations , the OECD and the Council of Europe , where the EU has been playing a leading role and should continue to do so .
The objectives and purposes of combating corruption at EU level as referred to in article 29 TEU need to be put clearly and coherently in the context of other policy objectives resulting from the EC treaty such as sound decision making , fair competition , effective functioning of the internal market , protection of the financial interests of the European Communities , external aid and assistance , open , free and fair international trade .
A clear delimitation of the initiatives outlined in the present Communication with respect to actions in the above mentioned policy areas is necessary with a view to providing a comprehensive framework and to ensuring complementarity between the different areas .
This Communication sets out an overview of what has been achieved at EU level , but also indicates what needs to be improved to give fresh impetus to the fight against corruption .
It also seeks to identify possible areas where the EU might be an appropriate actor to take future initiatives in the fight against corruption .
It is the Commission &apos;s firm intention to reduce corruption at all levels in a coherent way within the EU institutions , in EU Member States and outside the EU , i.e.
political corruption , corrupt activities committed by and collusively with organised crime groups , private-to-private and so-called petty corruption .
As long as there is crime , the interest to use bribes as insurance against prosecution and punishment will remain and especially organised crime groups will rather reinvest a certain amount of their illicitly acquired gains into bribe-paying than running the risk of law enforcement measures against them and thus facing deprivation of liberty and the loss of their proceeds .
Yet , it can be assumed that the level and degree of corruption within our societies could be considerably diminished if repressive measures were strengthened and opportunities reduced .
To this end , corrupt acts have to be detected and prosecuted and offenders have to be punished and deprived of their illicit proceeds .
At the same time , opportunities for corrupt practices have to be reduced and potential conflicts of interest have to be prevented through transparent and accountable administrative structures at legislative , executive and judicial level as well as in the private sector .
Comprehensive integrity-enhancing strategies , exchange of best practices and institutional safeguards should ensure that decisions in the public sector are solely taken in the public interest .
2 .
TERMINOLOGY There is no single uniform definition of all the constituent elements of corruption .
Whereas one of the rather traditional definitions , followed by the World Bank and the non-governmental organisation Transparency International , views corruption as &quot; the use of one &apos;s public position for illegitimate private gains &quot; , it appears more appropriate to use a broader definition such as the one of the Global Programme against Corruption run by the United Nations , i.e.
&quot; abuse of power for private gain &quot; and including thereby both the entire public and private sector .
The Civil Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe ( Strasbourg 4 / 11 / 1999 ; European Treaty Series n ° 174 ) defines &quot; corruption &quot; as &quot; requesting , offering , giving or accepting , directly or indirectly , a bribe or any other undue advantage or prospect thereof , which distorts the proper performance of any duty or behaviour required of the recipient of the bribe , the undue advantage or the prospect thereof . &quot;
Given their very nature , the aforementioned EU instruments define corruption purely from a criminal law perspective criminalising a conduct , which is usually referred to as ( active or passive ) bribery .
Cf .
Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European , articles 2 and 3 of the first protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests and articles 2 and 3 of the Joint Action on corruption in the private sector .
In the following , a distinction should be made between corruption in this narrower criminal law sense and corruption in a broader socio-economic sense .
This distinction is necessary because , in accordance with rule of law principles , criminal law provisions require unambiguous and precise language , whereas the concept of corruption can be more general while responding to the purposes of crime prevention .
In this context , the definition of corruption could embrace concepts such as integrity , transparency , accountability and good governance .
Hence , the boundaries for an EU anti-corruption policy will differ depending on the subject : Whereas the initiatives mentioned in chapters 4 and 5 rather address corruption in a narrower criminal law sense , chapters 3 , 6 and 7 and the list of general principles attached to this Communication are subject of a much broader concept of corruption .
IT IS USEFUL NOTING THAT THESE PRINCIPLES ARE REFLECTED IN THE DISCIPLINARY RULES AS LAID DOWN E.G.
IN THE STAFF REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL OFFICIALS AND OTHER AGENTS OF THE EU INSTITUTIONS .
3 .
POLITICAL COMMITMENT - A PRIORITY Combating and preventing corruption can only be successful when all parts of society agree that this is indispensable .
However , the most important signal has to come from leaders and decision-makers themselves .
Public agents would find it difficult to act impartially , objectively and solely in the public interest if the country &apos;s highest representatives did not promote and live up to the anti-corruption standards to be established .
Clear political determination and an unambiguous stance of EU governments and its representatives would also give a clear signal to their counterparts in those countries preparing for accession and to the rest of the world .
In this context , the Commissions recalls the underlying and common principles of the Union as stipulated in article 6 of the Treaty on European Union : liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
Whereas corruption undermines all of these principles , the unlimited respect of these common values is indeed the best safeguard against the spread of corrupt practices .
The conclusions and recommendations of this Communication should be fully endorsed by the European Council at one of its next meetings .
4 .
PUTTING EFFECT TO CRIMINAL LAW INSTRUMENTS Further to the European Council of Tampere , devoted exclusively to Justice and Home Affairs matters , the so-called Millennium Strategy on the Prevention and Control of Organised Crime of 27 March 2000 quotes corruption in the context of financial crime as one of those offences where the Council &quot; should adopt instruments with a view to approximating the legislation of Member States &quot; by agreeing on common definitions , incriminations and sanctions and developing a more general ( i.e.
multi-disciplinary ) EU policy towards these specific form of crime , taking into account as appropriate work being carried out in other international organisations ( cf .
Tampere Presidency conclusion 48 and recommendation 7 of the Millennium Strategy ) .
a ) Ratification of EU anti-corruption instruments In its recommendation 27 , the Millennium Strategy has urged those Member States , which have not yet ratified the following EU anti-corruption instruments to make proposals to their Parliaments with a view to speedy ratification within the given timetable : ( 1 ) by mid-2001 the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities &apos; Financial Interests ( PIF-Convention ) ; ( 2 ) by the end of 2001 the Protocols to the PIF-Convention ; ( 3 ) by the end of 2001 the EU Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of the EU Member States .
With the ratification of all EU Member States , the PIF-Convention and its 1st Protocol ( which has for the first time legally defined active and passive corruption at EU level ) entered into force on 17 October 2002 .
Moreover , in May 2001 the Commission adopted a proposal for a Directive , which would provide for a common definition of active and passive corruption to the detriment of the Communities financial interests .
Further to the opinion of the European Parliament , who approved the text in principle at the first reading , the proposal was amended on 16 October 2002 .
The Council is still examining this proposal .
The proposal aims at aligning substantive criminal law in the Member States as regards the definition of fraud , corruption and money laundering affecting Community financial interests as well as criminal liability and the criminal penalties applicable , in accordance with the PIF-Convention and its two protocols .
Whilst these instruments are limited to criminal behaviour damaging the financial interests of the European Communities , the 1997 Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union criminalises active and passive transborder corruption within the EU territory , even when Communities financial interests are not affected .
However , two EU Member States have still not completed the ratification process .
The Commission calls upon those Member States which have not yet ratified the EU Convention on Corruption and / or the 2nd Protocol to the PIF-Convention , to do so without any further delay .
b ) Ratification of international anti-corruption instruments All EU Member States have ratified the OECD Convention on bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions of 1997 and have adjusted their criminal law accordingly .
With 14 ratifications completed , the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe entered into force on 1 July 2002 .
Still , only four EU Member States have ratified this Convention .
Only 2 EU Member States have ratified the Civil Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe so far .
The Commission calls upon those Member States which have not yet ratified the Criminal and / or the Civil Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe or which have not joined the Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) , to do so without any further delay .
c ) Monitoring the implementation of anti-corruption instruments Once these EU and international instruments will have come into force by effective enacting legislation , many of the Member States &apos; relevant criminal law provisions ( incriminations , sanctions and confiscation , liability of and sanctions for legal persons , extradition , prosecution and cooperation between Member States &apos; law enforcement authorities ) will be already assimilated .
The Commission is of the opinion that all international efforts on combating corruption can only prove their worth if they are followed by monitoring and evaluation mechanisms based on peer review .
On the other hand , ( costly and often counterproductive ) duplication of international activities should be avoided as much as possible .
As guardian of the Treaties , the Commission has a general role in monitoring the implementation of in particular EC law and closely following the implementation of all EU instruments by the Member States Nevertheless , apart from the possibility to submit questions on interpretation and validity on Framework Decisions and Conventions to the European Court of Justice by way of preliminary rulings , the EU instruments do not provide a genuine follow-up monitoring or evaluating mechanism comparable to the ( subregional ) OECD Working Group on Bribery or the ( mainly European ) Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) mandated to ensure the implementation of the OECD Bribery Convention and the Council of Europe &apos;s Criminal and Civil Law Conventions .
GRECO is responsible for monitoring observance of the Council of Europe &apos;s 20 Guiding Principles for the Fight against Corruption and implementation of the Criminal and Civil Law Conventions on Corruption and on codes of conduct for public officials .
It evaluates in two phases through peer review , the compliance with undertakings contained in these legal instruments and thus contributes to identifying deficiencies and insufficiencies of national mechanisms against corruption , and to prompting the necessary legislative , institutional and practical reforms in order to better prevent and combat corruption .
In this context , it is useful recalling that both Council of Europe Conventions on corruption followed the adoption of the EU criminal law instruments and developed them further .
GRECO became operational as of 1 May 1999 and currently has 34 members , including all EU Member States ( except Austria and Italy ) and candidate countries ( except Turkey ) and the US .
The Commission is of the opinion that at this stage a separate EU anti-corruption evaluation and monitoring mechanism is inappropriate , because this would run against the Commission &apos;s general conviction that unnecessary duplication of efforts should be avoided .
Both Conventions on Corruption of the Council of Europe and GRECO &apos;s Statute provide already specific accession clauses for the European Community .
Whilst accession to the Criminal Law Convention and GRECO membership independent of the two Conventions requires a formal invitation by the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers , the accession to the Civil Law Convention , followed automatically by GRECO membership , can be unilaterally decided by the EC .
Hence , the Commission will prepare , within the limits of Community competence , the accession of the European Community to both Conventions on Corruption of the Council of Europe and request the Council for authorisation to negotiate with the Council of Europe the terms and modalities of the Community &apos;s subsequent participation in GRECO .
EU Member States should in the Council and in the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe fully support the possible application of the European Community , prepared by the Commission , to the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe , including its subsequent participation in GRECO , based on the appropriate modalities to be agreed .
In case participation in GRECO will not be considered a viable option , the Commission would consider if a separate EU mutual evaluation and monitoring mechanism on the fight against corruption could be set up .
d ) Improving judicial and police cooperation within the EU Police and judicial cooperation within the EU has been strengthened through the setting-up of EUROJUST , a judicial cooperation network , and an extended mandate for Europol .
The creation of the provisional EUROJUST unit was approved in December 2001 and nomination of its members took place in July 2002 .
EUROJUST is composed of one magistracy ( prosecutor , judge , police officers with prosecuting powers ) for each Member State with a view to facilitating contacts , enabling cooperation between magistrates and discovering links between on-going transborder cases .
The material competence of EUROJUST is very similar to the mandate of the Europol Convention covering inter alia fraud and corruption , money laundering and participation in a criminal organisation .
Hence , both bodies can and will be dealing with transborder corruption cases and thus fulfil requirements stemming from relevant provisions of the EU anti-corruption instruments .
Also the European Financial Prosecutor as proposed by the Commission in its Green Paper of 11 December 2001 would be mandated to deal with corruption offences provided they affect the financial interests of the Community .
In this context , the Framework Decision on the European Arrest Warrant , whose provisions will be applied by all Member States at the latest on 1 January 2004 , will be a key factor in the fight against corruption .
The Framework Decision will include the offence of corruption among the offences for which prior verification of double criminality is not required , and this should ensure that offenders are surrendered to the judicial authorities of the requesting State .
Furthermore , the Council is currently examining proposals for two new legal acts , which once adopted , would engage Member States to adjust national legislation or adopt new provisions with a view to ensuring mutual recognition of freezing orders , including proceeds of corruption offences , and facilitating confiscation of proceeds , especially by allowing the competent authorities to confiscate property belonging to a person convicted of a criminal act &quot; that is of such nature that it can generate substantial proceeds &quot; , unless that person can demonstrate that the property was legitimately acquired .
In the two texts , no specific predicate offences are listed ; it would be applicable to all acts punishable by a maximum sentence of up to six years &apos; imprisonment .
Albeit from a legal point of view not covering the area of judicial and police cooperation , it is useful also recalling in this context that the second Money Laundering Directive adopted in November 2001 extends the scope of predicate offences to all serious crime , including explicitly &quot; corruption &quot; , and obliges Member States to combat and to prevent the laundering of proceeds stemming from these offences .
Actions which amount to corruption under the laws of the Member States , whether passive or active or in the private or public sectors , should be covered taking into account the common standards and definitions developed under the EU instruments and the OECD Bribery Convention and the Council of Europe Conventions on Corruption .
e ) Fighting private-to-private corruption As regards private sector corruption , a Joint Action on corruption in the private sector was adopted in December 1998 , which calls on Member States to make a criminal offence of both active and passive corruption of a person acting in the course of business .
Member States may however limit themselves to cover conduct which involves the distortion of competition within the common market and which results in economic damage to others by the improper award or execution of a contract .
Still , the Joint Action only committed the Member States &apos; governments , but not the national parliaments and indeed up to now , only eight Member States have implemented the Joint Action in its entirety .
Hence , Denmark submitted in July 2002 an initiative for a Council Framework Decision on combating private sector corruption .
It is supposed to reformat and to further develop the Joint Action of 1998 and thus have a more binding character than the previous instrument .
The Commission recalls that the aforesaid Joint Action was accompanied by a Council declaration , which was supported by the Commission , suggesting to take further steps in the future .
At their meeting on 19 December 2002 , EU Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs reached a general political agreement on the text of the draft Framework Decision .
The Commission welcomes this initiative , which takes into account the process of privatisation in former public companies at large .
The suggested instrument would also ensure that there is no imbalance between the instruments covering corruption involving public officials and corruption between private entities .
Thus , independent of the organisational structure of certain sectors within the EU and taking into account that the public sector criminal law instruments refer to domestic law when defining what public officials are , possible legal discrepancies can be evened out with a view to giving the same degree of legal protection against the same corrupt behaviour .
Furthermore , the Danish initiative seeks to follow the approach chosen in other Framework Decisions .
f ) Detecting , prosecuting and punishing corruption cases Whilst substantial criminal law legislation on corruption covering both active and passive in the public and the private sector is already or will be shortly in place in all EU Member States and its candidate countries - thanks to supranational efforts in this field by drawing up the aforementioned EU and international anti-corruption instruments - the true problem of the fight against corruption seems to lie rather in the field of implementing these laws , i.e.
preventing , investigating , prosecuting and adjudicating corruption cases .
This is due to the fact that corruption is often referred to as the crime without ( direct ) victim .
Hence , there is rarely an affected party being able to report a corruption case to police and judicial authorities and indeed very few cases of corruption are reported .
This is probably due to the fact that corruption usually is sealed through the pact of silence between briber and bribee , who have a mutual interest in concealing their activities as far as possible .
Furthermore there are only very limited statistics and crime records on corruption cases , and those that exist do not serve as indicators of the general problem due to the high number of unreported cases .
Consequently , it is very difficult to draw the right conclusions and the only way in order to know more is to convince witnesses to report corruption cases .
This can only be achieved by the effective protection of whistleblowers against victimisation and retaliation ( loss of job , personal threats etc . )
and witness protection instruments as suggested in the Millennium Strategy on the prevention and control of organised crime ( cf .
Recommendation n ° 25 ) .
Often , there will be no witnesses at all that could report a corruption case , so that the only way to reveal corrupt practices seems to be to give incentives for persons directly involved in these practices to report their accomplices .
If none of these possibilities provides the right solution , one has to think , as a last resort , about ways to facilitate the burden of proof for law enforcement authorities .
The Commission Decision on raising concerns about serious wrongdoings sets out clear rules for the Commission staff on what to do and whom to contact in cases of e.g.
fraud or corruption .
Member States should , where appropriate at the proposal of the Commission , introduce common standards for collection of evidence , special investigative techniques , protection for whistleblowers , victims and witnesses of corruption and the confiscation of proceeds of corruption with a view to facilitating the detection , investigation , prosecution and adjudication of corruption cases .
They should ensure that appropriate remedies are available for victims of corruption .
The Commission invites Member States to introduce , where appropriate , clear guidelines for staff of public administrations .
Reference might be made to the Commission Decision of 4 April 2002 as a model for such guidelines .
It is estimated that the global cost of corruption adds up to approximately 5 % of the world economy .
Organised crime groups use up to 30 % of their proceeds to bribe police , prosecutors , judges and public administration in general to &quot; purchase exemption &quot; from law enforcement measures .
However , comparatively little public money is used to investigate and to prevent corruption cases , although experience shows that higher investment into specialised anti-corruption services could multiply the detection and prosecution of offenders and thereby the effectiveness of any anti-corruption policy .
Specialised anti-corruption authorities and Member States &apos; officials fighting against corruption and related economic crimes such as fraud , money laundering , tax and accounting offences must enjoy appropriate independence , autonomy and protection in the exercise of their functions , be free from improper influence and have effective means for gathering evidence and protecting those persons helping the authorities in combating corruption .
Interagency co-operation and joint investigations , focusing on financial investigations should be enhanced and networks and national contact points specifically dealing with corruption cases should be set-up in order to facilitate international cooperation .
In addition to these suggested initiatives , the Commission has advocated a revision of the EC Treaty to enable the creation of an independent European Public Prosecutor responsible for detecting , prosecuting and remitting for trial the authors of offences against the EC financial interests including corruption of EU public servants .
The establishment of a European public prosecutor would guarantee effective criminal law enforcement while contributing to the respect for individual rights and securing judicial review of the OLAF operational activities SEE COMMISSION GREEN PAPER ON THE PROTECTION OF COMMUNITY FINANCIAL INTERESTS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A EUROPEAN PUBLIC PROSECUTOR , COM ( 2001 ) 715 FROM 12 / 12 / 2001 AND ITS FOLLOW-UP REPORT COM ( 2003 ) 128 FINAL OF 19 / 03 / 2003 .
COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT , THE COUNCIL AND THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE Fighting Corruption in the EU / * COM / 2011 / 0308 final * / COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT , THE COUNCIL AND THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE Fighting Corruption in the EU 1 .
Introduction Four out of five EU citizens regard corruption as a serious problem in their Member State .
Despite the fact that the European Union over the last decades has contributed significantly to opening up Europe and making it more transparent , it is evident that a lot remains to be done .
It is not acceptable that an estimated 120 billion Euros per year , or one percent of the EU GDP , is lost to corruption .
This is certainly not a new problem to the EU , and we will not be able to totally eradicate corruption from our societies , but it is telling that the average score of the EU27 in Transparency International &apos;s Corruption Perception Index has improved only modestly over the last ten years .
Although the nature and extent of corruption vary , it harms all EU Member States and the EU as a whole .
It inflicts financial damage by lowering investment levels , hampering the fair operation of the internal market and reducing public finances .
It causes social harm as organised crime groups use corruption to commit other serious crimes , such as trafficking in drugs and human beings .
Moreover , if not addressed , corruption can undermine trust in democratic institutions and weaken the accountability of political leadership .
Over the last decade , some efforts have been made at international , EU and national level to reduce corruption &#91; 5 &#93; .
At EU level , the anti-corruption legal framework has developed by the adoption of legislation on corruption in the private sector and the accession of the EU to the United Nations Convention against Corruption ( UNCAC ) .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union recognises that corruption is a serious crime with a cross-border dimension which Member States are not fully equipped to tackle on their own .
Anti-corruption measures have , to some extent , been integrated within a range of EU policies .
However , the implementation of the anti-corruption legal framework remains uneven among EU Member States and unsatisfactory overall .
The EU anti-corruption legislation is not transposed in all Member States .
Some countries have not ratified the most important international anti-corruption instruments .
More importantly , even where anti-corruption institutions and legislation are in place its enforcement is often insufficient in practice .
This reflects a lack of firm political commitment on the part of leaders and decision-makers to combat corruption in all its forms - political corruption , corrupt activities committed by and with organised crime groups , private-to-private corruption and so-called petty corruption .
There is thus an evident need to stimulate political will to fight corruption , and improve the coherence of anti-corruption policies and actions taken by Member States .
That is why the Commission will set up a new mechanism , the EU Anti-Corruption Report , to monitor and assess Member States &apos; efforts against corruption , and consequently encourage more political engagement .
Supported by an expert group and a network of research correspondents , and the necessary EU budget , the Report will be managed by the Commission and published every two years , starting in 2013 .
It will give a fair reflection of the achievements , vulnerabilities and commitments of all Member States .
It will identify trends and weaknesses that need to be addressed , as well as stimulate peer learning and exchange of best practices .
Alongside this mechanism , the EU should participate in the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) .
The EU should also put stronger focus on corruption in all relevant EU policies – internal as well as external .
The Commission will therefore , in particular , propose modernised EU rules on confiscation of criminal assets in 2011 , a strategy to improve criminal financial investigations in Member States in 2012 , and adopt in 2011 an Action Plan for how to improve crime statistics .
The Commission will also work with EU agencies such as Europol , Eurojust and CEPOL , as well as with OLAF to step up judicial and police cooperation and improve training of law enforcement officials .
It will continue to prepare modernised EU rules on procurement and on accounting standards and statutory audit for EU companies .
Also , the Commission will adopt a strategy to combat fraud affecting the financial interests of the EU in 2011 .
In parallel , the Commission will put a stronger focus on anti-corruption issues within the EU enlargement process and - together with the High Representative - in our neighbourhood policy , as well as make greater use of conditionality in cooperation and development policies .
Business sector initiatives and private-public dialogue at EU level on how to prevent corruption should be further developed .
This Communication presents the objectives of the EU Anti-Corruption Report and how it will operate in practice , and explains how the EU should place greater emphasis on corruption in internal and external policies .
It will be complemented by a Commission Anti-Fraud Strategy .
While the former focuses on the enforcement of anti-corruption policies by the Member States , the latter will mainly cover measures under the responsibility of the Commission for the protection of EU financial interests.2.
Stronger monitoring of anti-corruption efforts 2.1 .
Current monitoring and evaluation mechanisms To date there is no mechanism in place monitoring the existence , and assessing the effectiveness , of anti-corruption policies at EU and Member State level in a coherent cross-cutting manner .
At international level , the main existing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms are the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) , the OECD Working Group on Bribery , and the review mechanism of the UN Convention against Corruption ( UNCAC ) .
Those mechanisms provide an impetus for states parties to implement and enforce anti-corruption standards .
However , they each have several features limiting their potential to address effectively the problems associated with corruption at EU level .
The most inclusive existing instrument relevant for the EU is GRECO , in as much as all Member States are participating .
Through GRECO , the Council of Europe contributes to ensuring minimum standards in a pan-European legal area .
However , given the limited visibility of the intergovernmental GRECO evaluation process and its follow-up mechanism , it has , so far , not generated the necessary political will in the Member States to tackle corruption effectively .
Furthermore , GRECO monitors compliance with a spectrum of anti-corruption standards established by the Council of Europe and accordingly focuses less on specific areas of the EU legislation , such as public procurement .
The GRECO system , moreover , does not allow for comparative analysis and hence the identification of corruption trends in the EU , nor does it actively stimulate the exchange of best practices and peer learning .
The OECD &apos;s Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Officials in International Business Transactions ( Anti-Bribery Convention ) focuses on the specific issue of bribery of foreign public officials in international business transactions , and cannot be extended to other areas of importance for the fight against corruption in the EU .
The seventh annual Progress Report prepared by Transparency International indicated that enforcement of the Anti-Bribery Convention has been uneven : active enforcement occurred in only four EU Member States and little or no enforcement in 12 EU Member States .
In spite of a thorough evaluation system in the form of the OECD Working Group on Bribery , political commitment to effective implementation of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention has remained insufficient .
The UN Convention against Corruption ( UNCAC ) entered into force in December 2005 , and the EU joined in September 2008 .
The Conference of States Parties to UNCAC adopted the terms of reference of the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of UNCAC in November 2009 .
The EU supports the involvement of civil society and transparency in the findings of the evaluations under the Mechanism .
However , several features are likely to limit the potential of the UNCAC review mechanism to address problems associated with corruption at EU level : it is an intergovernmental instrument , the cross-review system is likely to leave out policy areas of particular relevance to the EU , it includes states parties which may have lower anti-corruption standards than the EU , the review cycles will be of relatively long duration , and recommendations to states parties which are not implemented might be followed up only a limited number of times .
2.2 .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report Given the limitations of the existing international monitoring and evaluation mechanisms explained above , a specific EU monitoring and assessment mechanism , the EU Anti-Corruption Report , should be established to prompt stronger political will in the Member States and enforcement of the existing legal and institutional tools .
That mechanism should be combined with EU participation in GRECO .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will be issued by the Commission every two years , starting in 2013 .
The establishment of the EU Anti-Corruption Report is the Commission &apos;s response to the call from Member States , in the Stockholm Programme , to &apos; develop indicators , on the basis of existing systems and common criteria , to measure anti-corruption efforts within the Union &apos; , and from the European Parliament to monitor anti-corruption efforts in the Member States on a regular basis .
The establishment of the EU Anti-Corruption Report starts from the principle that although there is no &apos; one-size-fits-all &apos; solution to fighting corruption , corruption is a concern for all EU Member States .
Through periodical assessment and publication of objective fact-based reports , the Report will create an additional impetus for Member States to tackle corruption effectively , notably by implementing and enforcing internationally agreed anti-corruption standards .
The mechanism , applicable equally to all Member States , will provide a clearer overview of the existence and effectiveness of anti-corruption efforts in the EU , help identify specific causes of corruption , and thus provide grounds for sound preparation of future EU policy actions .
It will moreover act as a &apos; crisis alert &apos; to mitigate the potential risks of deeply-rooted problems which could evolve into a crisis .
When preparing the EU Anti-Corruption Report the Commission will cooperate with existing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to avoid additional administrative burdens for Member States and duplication of efforts .
It will draw on the minimum standards against corruption established by existing international instruments such as the Council of Europe &apos;s Criminal Law Convention on Corruption , Civil Law Convention on Corruption , Twenty guiding principles for the fight against corruption , the UNCAC and the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention .
Given that almost all forms of corruption may have cross-border implications , the Report will not be limited to an exhaustive list of priority areas .
Each EU Anti-Corruption Report will however focus on a number of cross-cutting issues of particular relevance at EU level , as well as selected issues specific to each Member State .
These will be assessed against a number of indicators , based on the already existing standards in the respective fields and some newly developed in the process of preparing the Report .
New indicators will be developed where relevant standards are not yet laid down in an existing instrument or where higher standards are required at EU level .
In the selection of existing and the development of new indicators , the Commission will consult competent anti-corruption authorities in the Member States .
Indicators may include : perceptions of corruption , respondents ’ behaviour linked to corrupt activities , and criminal justice statistics , including on seizures and confiscations of the proceeds of corruption-related crime .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will include a quantitative assessment of those indicators and a qualitative analysis of corruption trends and results .
The Anti-Corruption Report will comprise : A thematic section , highlighting specific aspects of the fight against corruption in the EU based on research and including thematic case studies , examples of best practices and recommendations .
Country analyses , including tailor-made recommendations directed to individual Member States , based on the results of existing monitoring mechanisms and reviews of available evidence from relevant sources .
This section may be accompanied by recommendations for appropriate action at EU level .
Trends at EU level , including the results of a Eurobarometer survey on corruption conducted every two years , measuring perception of corruption in various areas among EU citizens , as well as other relevant sources of information on the experiences with corruption at EU level .
In drawing up the Report , the Commission will rely on a variety of sources of information , including existing monitoring mechanisms ( GRECO , OECD , UNCAC ) , independent experts , research findings , Commission services and the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , Member States , EU agencies such as Europol and Eurojust , the European Anti-Corruption Network , Eurobarometer surveys and civil society .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will be managed by the Commission assisted by : An expert group advising on : ( 1 ) establishing indicators , ( 2 ) assessing Member States &apos; performance , ( 3 ) identifying best practices , ( 4 ) identifying EU trends , ( 5 ) making recommendations , and ( 6 ) proposing new EU measures where appropriate .
The group will be set up by the Commission , following an open call procedure .
The selected experts may come from a wide range of backgrounds ( law enforcement , prevention of corruption , civil society , research etc .
) , must enjoy undisputed anti-corruption expertise , a high reputation for integrity and commit to act in their personal professional capacity .
A network of local research correspondents set up by the Commission and consisting of representatives of civil society and academia , who will collect relevant information in each Member State to feed and complement the work of the expert group .
Directly linked to the EU Anti-Corruption Report , the development of an experience sharing programme may be considered to help Member States , local NGOs and other stakeholders to identify shortcomings in anti-corruption policies and best practices , raise awareness or provide training .
The Commission will bear all expenses associated with the EU Anti-Corruption Report , including those of the independent expert group , the network of research correspondents and , if set up , the experience sharing programme .
EU participation in GRECO , although not fully responding to the EU &apos;s needs for periodic reporting on anti-corruption efforts across the EU , would create synergies between the two mechanisms .
GRECO could , in particular , provide input to the EU monitoring mechanism in the form of comparative analyses of the existing GRECO evaluation and compliance reports on the EU Member States , and indication of key outstanding recommendations requiring additional follow-up .
In the light of the above , the Commission is setting up an EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism to periodically assess the Member States &apos; efforts in fighting corruption and will request the authorisation of the Council to negotiate EU participation in GRECO with the Council of Europe .
The Commission will consider in the medium and long term , based on the findings of the EU Anti-Corruption Report , the need for additional EU policy initiatives , including the approximation of criminal law in the field of corruption.3.
Better implementation of existing anti-corruption instruments A number of anti-corruption legal instruments are already in place at EU , European and international level .
This includes the EU Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of the EU Member States which entered into force on 28 September 2005 .
With the exception of that Convention , the existing instruments have , however , not yet been ratified and transposed into the law of all EU Member States .
To address corruption effectively , Member States should , as a minimum , take steps to complete the process of ratification and transposition .
3.1 .
Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA on combating corruption in the private sector Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA on combating corruption in the private sector , adopted in July 2003 , aims to criminalise both active and passive bribery , establishing more detailed rules on the liability of legal persons and deterrent sanctions .
The first implementation report issued in 2007 showed that many Member States had done little to apply it .
Shortcomings were found in the criminalisation of all elements of active and passive bribery and the provisions on the liability of legal persons .
The second implementation report accompanying this Communication shows that several Member States have still not transposed the most detailed provisions on criminalisation of all elements of active and passive bribery .
Moreover , the liability of legal persons continues to be regulated in an uneven manner at national level .
The Commission urges the Member States to fully transpose all provisions of Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA without delay and to ensure that it is effectively implemented .
Depending on progress , the Commission will consider proposing a Directive replacing the Framework Decision .
In this context , the Commission welcomes the adoption by certain Member States of stricter rules to prevent private sector corruption and reinforced corporate liability for corruption offences .
The Commission intends to support the public-private dialogue and the exchange of best practices in this area .
Private undertakings are encouraged to develop and implement clear common standard rules for their respective fields on accounting , internal audit , codes of conduct and protection of whistleblowers .
3.2 .
Other international anti-corruption instruments Several EU Member States have ratified all or most of the existing international anti-corruption instruments .
However , three EU Member States have not ratified the Council of Europe &apos;s Criminal Law Convention on Corruption , twelve have not ratified its additional Protocol and seven have not ratified the Civil Law Convention on Corruption .
Three Member States have not yet ratified the UNCAC .
Five EU Member States have not ratified the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention .
The Commission urges Member States that have not ratified those instruments to do so without delay , taking into account where appropriate the exclusive external competence of the Union , and to fully implement them .
The Commission requests the Member States to notify the Commission without delay of the steps they have taken with a view to ratifying these instruments and any reasons for non-ratification .
In this context , ratification and effective enforcement of the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention by all EU Member States is of particular importance .
The Commission will analyse possible difficulties encountered by non-OECD EU Member States in the ratification process , as well as deficiencies in implementation and enforcement .
3.3 .
Cooperation between the EU and the existing international anti-corruption instruments The Stockholm Programme calls for increased coordination between Member States in the framework of UNCAC , GRECO and OECD work .
To that end , the Commission will act , in particular , in the following areas .
As regards UNCAC , the Convention contains a legal obligation to carry out self-assessments .
In the case of the EU , that process is complex as it involves cooperation between all EU institutions , as well as with Member States in the matters falling under shared competence .
The Commission has however initiated the process and is analysing the impact of the changes brought by the Lisbon Treaty on the scope of the obligations of the EU within UNCAC .
Once that analysis is completed , the modalities of participation in the review mechanism , including the appointment of experts , will be determined .
The Commission will enhance cooperation with the OECD , possibly through the conclusion of a Memorandum of Understanding .
The findings of the OECD &apos;s Working Group on Bribery will be used as input for the EU Anti-Corruption Report .
The Commission has analysed the possible modalities for the EU &apos;s participation in GRECO and will initiate , within the limits of EU competence , the necessary procedures in this regard &#91; 40 &#93; .
Member States should support the EU &apos;s application to participate in GRECO within the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe .
The Commission also supports the anti-corruption efforts made within the context of the G-20 and will contribute to the implementation of the G-20 anti-corruption action plan endorsed at the Seoul Summit in November 2010.6 .
Conclusion Corruption continues to be a cause of concern in the EU , as it is globally .
Although the nature and extent of corruption vary , it exists in all Member States , causing serious economic , social , and democratic harm .
International instruments , and EU anti-corruption legislation , are already in place , but implementation remains insufficient .
The Commission calls on EU Member States to ensure that all relevant legal instruments are fully transposed into their legislation and , crucially , effectively followed up and enforced through the detection and prosecution of corruption offences , backed up by criminal law provisions and a systematic track record of deterrent penalties and asset recovery .
To achieve this , firmer political commitment by all decision-makers in the EU is needed .
The existing international monitoring and evaluation mechanisms have , so far , not produced the necessary momentum .
Action at EU level is therefore needed to strengthen the political will , in all EU Member States , to vigorously tackle corruption .
To that end , the Commission will set up the EU Anti-Corruption Report to periodically assess Member States &apos; efforts , starting in 2013 .
In parallel , the EU should negotiate its participation in the Council of Europe Group of State against Corruption ( GRECO ) .
The EU should also continue , as part of a comprehensive approach , to address corruption through all relevant EU policies – internal as well as external .
Greater focus should be put on corruption in the areas of judicial and police cooperation , modernised EU rules on confiscation of criminal assets , a revised EU public procurement legislation , better EU crime statistics , an enhanced anti-fraud policy to protect EU financial interests , the EU enlargement process , and greater use of conditionality in EU cooperation and development policies .
At the same time , private-public dialogue at EU level on how to prevent corruption within the business sector should be further developed with the support of the Commission .
These initiatives will not , realistically , eradicate corruption , within or outside the EU .
Taken together , they will however help to reduce the problem , to the benefit of all .
This Communication uses the broad definition of corruption adopted by the Global Programme against Corruption run by the United Nations : &apos; abuse of power for private gain &apos; , which therefore covers corruption in both public and private sectors .
78 % , according to the 2009 Eurobarometer on corruption .
This survey is conducted every two years .
According to research by Transparency International , 5 % of the EU citizens pay a bribe annually .
One study suggests that corruption may add as much as 20-25 % to the total cost public procurement contracts .
The total economic costs of corruption cannot easily be calculated .
The cited figure is based on estimates by specialised institutions and bodies , such as the International Chamber of Commerce , Transparency International , UN Global Compact , World Economic Forum , Clean Business is Good Business , 2009 , which suggest that corruption amounts to 5 % of GDP at world level .
.
From 6.23 in 2000 to 6.30 in 2010 , out of the maximum 10 .
In the 2010 Index , although nine Member States were ranked amongst the 20 least corrupt countries in the world , eight Member States were ranked below 5 .
The main findings and tendencies of the Index for the EU have been confirmed by the World Bank &apos;s worldwide governance indicators , i.e.
a clear differences among individual Member States , with nine EU Member States ranked as best anti-corruption performers and ten as worst performers .
Article 83 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union lists corruption among those crimes for which directives providing minimum rules on definition of criminal offences and sanctions may be established , since corruption often has implications across , and beyond , internal EU borders .
Bribery across borders , but also other forms of corruption , such as corruption in the judiciary , may affect competition and investment flows .
The Commission does not have the power to bring legal proceedings against Member States for failure to transpose measures adopted under the Third Pillar of the Treaty , prior to the entry into force of the TFEU .
Such proceedings will be possible from 1 December 2014 , pursuant to Article 10 of Protocol No 36 on Transitional Provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
A specific monitoring mechanism applicable to two Member States , the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism ( CVM ) for Romania and Bulgaria , has existed since 2006 ( Commission Decisions 2006 / 928 / EC and 2006 / 929 / EC of 13 December 2006 ( OJ L 354 , 14.12.2006 , pp .
56 , 58 ) .
The CVM surfaced as an ad-hoc solution for the outstanding shortcomings found on the eve of EU accession .
In this context , the Commission carries out verifications against a number of pre-defined benchmarks in the area of justice reforms and anti-corruption , as well as , in the case of Bulgaria , the fight against organised crime .
Criminal Law Convention on Corruption ( STE 173 , adopted on 27 January 1999 ) and its additional Protocol ( ETS 191 , adopted on 15 May 2003 ) ; Civil Law Convention on Corruption ( STE 174 , adopted on 4 November 1999 ) and the Twenty Guiding Principles against Corruption ( Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers &apos; Resolution ( 97 ) 24 ) .
Council document 17024 / 09 , adopted by the European Council on 10 / 11 December 2009 .
( OJ C 115 , p . 1 ) .
See also the Resolution of the Council 6902 / 05 , adopted on 14.4.2005 , which called upon the Commission to also consider the development of a mutual evaluation and monitoring mechanism .
Written Declaration No 2 / 2010 on the Union &apos;s efforts in combating corruption , adopted by the European Parliament on 18 May 2010 .
Assessments carried out by civil society of relevance will be considered .
This may include the on-going Transparency International study on the National Integrity Systems in the EU .
See the Report from Commission to the Council on the modalities of EU participation in GRECO , COM ( 2011 ) 307 .
COM ( 2011 ) 309 final .
The Report found that only 9 Member States ( i.e.
Belgium , Bulgaria , Czech Republic , France , Ireland , Cyprus , Portugal , Finland and UK ) have correctly transposed all elements of the offence as laid down in Article 2 of the Framework Decision .
OLAF has started with a systematic analysis of the corruption cases in order to identify the threats and vulnerabilities the EU budget is exposed to .
See the Report from Commission to the Council on the modalities of EU participation in GRECO , COM ( 2011 ) 307 .
Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and to the Council based on Article 8 of the Council Decision 2007 / 845 / JHA of 6 December 2007 concerning cooperation between Asset Recovery Offices of the Member States in the field of tracing and identification of proceeds from , or other property related to crime ( COM ( 2011 ) 176 final ) ; Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council based on Article 22 of the Council Framework Decision 2006 / 783 / JHA of 6 October 2006 on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to confiscation orders ( COM ( 2010 ) 428 ) ; Report from the Commission pursuant to Article 6 of the Council Framework Decision 2005 / 212 / JHA of 24 February 2005 on confiscation of crime related proceeds , instrumentalities and property ( COM ( 2007 ) 805 final ) ; Report from the Commission based on Article 14 of the Council Framework Decision 2003 / 577 / JHA of 22 July 2003 on the execution in the European Union of orders freezing property or evidence ( COM ( 2008 ) 885 final ) .
According to Article 21 ( 2 ) ( b ) of Directive 2005 / 60 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing , the &quot; FIU shall be established as a central national unit .
It shall be responsible for receiving ( and to the extent permitted , requesting ) , analyzing and disseminating to the competent authorities , disclosures of information which concern potential money laundering , potential terrorist financing or are required by national legislation or regulation .
It shall be provided with adequate resources in order to fulfill its tasks &quot; .
Directive 2004 / 18 / EC on the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts , public supply contracts and public service contracts ( OJ L 134 , 30.4.2004 , p . 114 ) and Directive 2004 / 17 / EC coordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water , energy , transport and postal services sectors ( OJ L 134 , 30.4.2004 , p . 1 ) .
Green Paper on the modernisation of EU public procurement policy .
Towards a more efficient European Public Procurement Market , COM ( 2011 ) 15 final .
Conclusions of the fifth report on economic , social and territorial cohesion : the future of cohesion policy , COM ( 2010 ) 642 final .
Directive 2006 / 43 / EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts , amending Council Directives 78 / 660 / EEC and 83 / 349 / EEC and repealing Council Directive 84 / 253 / EEC ( OJ L 157 , 9.6.2006 , p . 87 ) .
Green Paper on Audit Policy : Lessons from the Crisis , COM ( 2010 ) 561 final .
Allegations of links between politicians and influential businesses or media owners have been made repeatedly in recent years , notably regarding financing of electoral campaigns .
This support is ensured through the specific programme on &apos; Prevention and Fight against Crime &apos; .
Communication on the protection of the financial interests of the European Union by criminal law and by administrative investigations : An integrated policy to safeguard the taxpayers &apos; money , COM ( 2011 ) 293 final .
Joint Communication to the European Parliament , the Council , the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - A new response to a changing Neighbourhood , COM ( 2011 ) 303 .
Communication on Governance and Development , COM ( 2003 ) 615 final , and Communication on Governance in the European consensus on development : towards an harmonised approach within the European Union , COM ( 2006 ) 421 final .
E.g.
the governance initiative for African , Caribbean and Pacific countries which took the form of an &apos; incentive tranche &apos; of 2.7 billion Euros to encourage political will to reform .
Communication on the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade Action Plan , COM ( 2003 ) 251 final.4.
Stronger focus on corruption in EU internal policies In addition to stronger monitoring and implementation of existing legal instruments , anti-corruption considerations should , as part of a comprehensive approach , be integrated into all relevant EU policies – internal as well as external .
A stronger focus should be put on corruption , in particular , in the following policy areas .
4.1 .
Law enforcement , judicial and police cooperation within the EU Member States should take all necessary steps to ensure the effective detection , prosecution and a stable track record of dissuasive penalties and recovery of criminally acquired assets in corruption cases .
In this context , judicial and police cooperation between EU Member States , financial investigations , training of law enforcement personnel , and the protection of whistleblowers is of particular importance .
4.1.1 .
Judicial and police cooperation Under its 2010-2014 strategy , Europol is committed to providing increased support for law enforcement operations and function as the EU criminal information hub and EU centre for law enforcement expertise .
The Commission urges Europol to step up its efforts to combat corruption as a facilitator for organised crime activity .
This should include the production of regular threat assessments .
Since 2004 , Eurojust has been involved in a slightly increasing number of corruption cases .
Although in 2010 these cases represented only 2 % of its total workload , the growing number of Member States involved attests to an increasing need for judicial cooperation in corruption cases with a cross-border dimension .
The Commission urges Eurojust to strengthen its efforts to facilitate the exchange of information among Member States &apos; authorities on corruption cases with cross-border implications .
Finally , since 2008 the EU contact-point network against corruption ( EACN ) has brought together Member States &apos; anti-corruption authorities , as well as the Commission , OLAF , Europol and Eurojust .
The EACN is managed by the Austrian-led network European Partners against Corruption ( EPAC ) .
The Commission will work with the EACN towards more concrete deliverables , stronger focus on operational issues of relevance for corruption investigators , and a clearer delimitation of the respective roles of EPAC and the EACN .
The Commission considers preparing a proposal to modify the Council Decision establishing the EACN .
4.1.2 .
Financial investigations and asset recovery Four implementation reports issued by the Commission have pointed to delays in the efforts by many Member States to adopt measures regarding confiscation of the proceeds of crime .
In 2011 the Commission will propose a revised EU legal framework on confiscation and asset recovery to ensure that courts in Member States are able to effectively confiscate criminal and criminally tainted assets and to fully recover the corresponding values , including in cases involving corruption .
The third Anti-Money Laundering Directive lists corruption as one of the predicate offences for money laundering .
Evaluations conducted by the OECD &apos;s Working Group on Bribery suggest that very few foreign bribery cases are detected through the national anti-money laundering systems .
The Commission stresses the need for further cooperation between the Financial Intelligence Units , specialized anti-corruption agencies and law enforcement bodies in Member States .
Member States should ensure that financial investigations are pursued effectively and consistently in corruption cases and that any potential link with organized crime and money laundering is always considered .
The Commission will adopt a strategy in 2012 to strengthen the quality of financial investigations in Member States and the development of financial intelligence to be shared between authorities within Member States , as well as between Member States and EU agencies and at international level .
4.1.3 .
Protection of whistleblowers Effective protection of whistleblowers against retaliation is a key element of anti-corruption policies .
The relevant legal framework in the EU is uneven , creating difficulties in handling cases with a cross-border dimension .
The Commission will carry out an assessment of the protection of persons reporting financial crimes that will also cover protection of whistleblowers , and related data protection issues , as a basis for further action at EU level .
4.1.4 .
Training of law enforcement officials The Commission will support the development of targeted training programmes on corruption for law enforcement agencies through the European Police College ( CEPOL ) .
Those programmes should cover specific aspects of handling corruption cases with cross-border implications , for example , the gathering and exchanging of evidence , the link with financial investigations , and the link with investigations of organised crime offences .
4.2 .
Public procurement Public expenditure on works , goods and services accounts for roughly 19 % of EU GDP ( 2009 ) .
Almost a fifth of this expenditure falls within the scope of the EU Directives on public procurement ( i.e.
approx .
€ 420 billion , or 3.6 % of EU GDP ) .
The current EU legal framework on public procurementdoes not include specific provisions on prevention and sanctioning of conflicts of interest , and comprises only few specific rules on sanctioning favouritism and corruption .
In January 2011 , the Commission launched a consultation on the modernisation of EU public procurement policy .
It raises the question whether a common definition of conflict of interest and possible safeguards against such situations are needed at EU level , including the publication of concluded contracts to enhance transparency , the extension of exclusion grounds and &apos; self-cleaning &apos; measures .
In the preparation of a modernised EU public procurement legislation , the Commission will carefully consider these issues .
In this context , the Commission will also consider proposing legislation on concessions to create better conditions for the fair and competitive award of these contracts , thus reducing the risks of corruption .
4.3 .
Cohesion policy to support administrative capacity building The EU &apos;s cohesion policy supports the strengthening of institutional capacity in Member States to make public services and administrations more efficient .
Administrative capacity and good governance are included as main priorities in the 2007-2013 Community Strategic Guidelines for cohesion .
A total of 3.5 billion Euros have been allocated under those guidelines to strengthen institutional capacity at national , regional and local level of which 2 billion Euros stem from the European Social Fund .
The 2007-2013 European Social Fund regulation introduced a specific priority for strengthening administrative capacity in less developed regions and Member States .
Such support for institutional capacity will have a positive impact on preventing corruption , by making public services and administrations more efficient and transparent .
Some Member States have included measures to fight corrcuption in their operation programmes .
The Commission intends to continue support for the strengthening of institutional capacity and make it available to all Member States and regions .
4.4 .
Accounting standards and statutory audit for EU companies The use of International Financial Reporting Standards for consolidated financial statements of companies listed on the EU &apos;s stock markets became mandatory in 2005 .
The procedures on statutory audit were harmonised , introducing a requirement for external quality assurance , provisions on public supervision , duties and independence of statutory auditors and the application of international standards .
These measures increased the credibility , quality and transparency of financial reporting , reducing the risks of corruption .
The Commission conducted public consultations in 2010 on the audit policy lessons from the financial crisis .
The results of the consultation will assist the Commission in deciding on future measures aimed at ensuring consolidated checks and control systems within EU companies to reduce the risk of corrupt practices .
These may cover matters such as : clarifications of the role of auditors , governance and the independence of audit firms , supervision of auditors , creation of a single market for the provision of audit services , and the simplification of rules for SMEs .
4.5 .
Preventing and fighting political corruption As political scandals have repeatedly shown , complex connections are sometimes developed between political actors , private undertakings , media , trade associations and foundations .
These connections are driven by mutual benefits in influencing key political and economic decisions , putting democratic institutions and procedures at risk and rendering the detection of corrupt practices more difficult .
Under the impetus of the GRECO monitoring process , some progress has been seen in the legal and institutional setting for the financing of political parties in several Member States .
Unfortunately , the enforcement of transparency and supervision rules is still unsatisfactory in some Member States .
The Commission calls upon the Member States , the national Parliaments and the European Parliament to ensure more transparency and allow effective supervision of the financing of political parties and other interest groups .
The Commission is also committed to respecting its obligations to defend the general interest of the Union , in conformity with the obligations laid down by the Treaties , in its own Code of conduct and in other relevant rules .
The media have a key role in increasing transparency and accountability of political figures and are often a resourceful tool for fighting political corruption .
The Commission urges Member States to take all necessary measures to ensure effective implementation of the existing legal framework guaranteeing the independence and freedom of the media , including on media funding .
The Commission will support , through its existing programmes , training of media to strengthen knowledge in specific areas relevant for the detection of corruption ( e.g.
money laundering , political party financing , banking , stock exchange markets ) .
The Commission also supports in other ways action limiting political corruption , including through funding of civil society initiatives .
4.6 .
Improving statistics Currently there is no uniform statistical system across the EU to measure the nature and extent of corruption or the effectiveness of anti-corruption measures .
As a follow-up to the EU Action Plan to develop a comprehensive and coherent EU strategy to measure crime and criminal justice &#91; 54 &#93; , a new Action Plan ( 2011-2015 ) is under preparation .
The Commission will set up a sub-group of experts in statistics , as a first step in work aimed at establishing a uniform EU statistics system on corruption .
4.7 .
Integrity in sport Corruption in sport is an increasingly visible problem with cross-border dimensions , mainly related to opacity of transfers and match-fixing .
The Commission will analyse possible solutions to addres match-fixing more effectively by first launching a study on how corruption in sport is being covered in national legislation .
This may offer grounds for further policy actions in this area , such as possibly establishing minimum rules concerning the definition of criminal offences in this field .
4.8 .
Protecting EU public money against corruption More than a decade ago , corruption charges led to the entire resignation of the Commission and the setting up of the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
One of the core tasks of OLAF is to conduct administrative investigations for the purpose of fighting fraud , corruption and any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the EU .
In 2011 , several initiatives will be taken to step up the fight against fraud and corruption affecting EU public money .
The Communication on the protection of EU financial interests by criminal law and administrative investigations sets out how the Commission intends to safeguard taxpayers &apos; money at EU level against illegal activities , including against threats posed by corruption inside and outside the EU institutions .
The Communication points to opportunities for the improvement of the criminal law framework , of procedural tools for investigators and prosecutors , as well as possible institutional developments such as the setting up of a European Public Prosecutor &apos;s Office .
The Commission also intends to adopt a new anti-fraud strategy reinforcing the Union &apos;s financial policies with a view to better protect the EU &apos;s financial interests .
The strategy will identify priorities and specific areas of activity in order to enhance the current Commission anti-fraud framework , with a focus on prevention .
Complementing those initiatives , the Commission &apos;s proposal for amending the legal framework of OLAF aims at increasing the efficiency and speed of OLAF investigations , at strengthening procedural guarantees , as well as at reinforcing OLAF &apos;s cooperation with Member States and at improving its governance .
5 .
Stronger focus on corruption in EU external policies 5.1 .
Candidate countries , potential candidates and neighbourhood countries The process of enlargement of the EU has been a key vehicle for major anti-corruption reforms in the candidate countries and potential candidates .
The most recent accessions had a considerable impact on the actual weight of anti-corruption policies within the EU .
They also showed that at the time of accession it was still very difficult to demonstrate a track record of implementation and the irreversibility of anti-corruption reforms .
Moreover , following accession , efforts to fight corruption still had to be monitored .
The 2005 negotiating frameworks for Croatia and Turkey introduced a specific chapter covering a range of rule of law issues , including judicial reform and the fight against corruption .
The renewed consensus on enlargement , has further strengthened the focus on the rule of law .
Aware of the fact that , without a strong political will , investing EU funds in institution building alone cannot guarantee the success of anti-corruption policies , the Commission intensified in 2010 its dialogue on rule of law with the candidate countries and potential candidates .
The reinforced dialogue builds on the experience gained during the visa liberalisation process .
The roadmaps containing benchmarks to which countries had to conform in order to obtain visa liberalisation proved to be an efficient tool to motivate and prioritise reform .
The aim of the dialogue on rule of law is to strengthen such benchmarking at earlier stages of the pre-accession process .
The Commission Opinions on Albania &apos;s and Montenegro &apos;s applications for EU membership already set recommendations that should be met before the opening of negotiations .
The dialogue will be accompanied by yearly expert missions to be carried out with participation of experts from EU Member States , which will in this way be associated to the process more closely .
Based on these tools , the Commission will continue to give high priority to the monitoring of anti-corruption policies and will enforce thorough scrutiny from the early stages of accession preparations with the aim of securing guarantees for the sustainability of reforms .
The Commission will also promote close coordination of the international donors to avoid any overlapping and to better channel the resources invested .
Under the umbrella of the European Neighbourhood Policy , the High Representative and the Commission will promote reinforcing the capacity to fight corruption in the neighbourhood countries as a key aspect of the support given .
This is especially important given the recent events in North Africa , where uprisings against the regimes were also prompted by the urge to eradicate a culture of corruption in their countries .
5.2 .
Cooperation and development policies The support for strengthening good governance and democratisation granted by the EU as part of cooperation and development policy also covers anti-corruption policies .
The Commission follows in this context a partnership-based approach , engaging dialogue with partner countries ’ governments and civil society , EU Member States and other donors .
While recognising that without political will inside the country , outside support is unlikely to deliver results , the Commission considers that incentive-based approaches may prove their benefits .
The Commission intends to strengthen dialogue with partner countries on anti-fraud and anti-corruption issues and its support to capacity building , leading towards the adoption of national strategies to fight corruption in all its forms .
During the programming period as well as throughout the implementation process particular attention will be paid to such strategies and their effective implementation .
In line with that objective , the Commission will promote greater use of the conditionality principle in the field of development to encourage compliance with minimum international anti-corruption standards as set out in UNCAC and other international and regional conventions these countries are party to .
In the same vein , the Commission will promote a stronger use of the provisions covering anti-corruption matters already existing in the legal bases for cooperation with partner countries , undertaking specific consultations in response to instances of serious corruption cases , and applying sanctions if appropriate measures are not put in place .
Finally , the Commission has established , and will continue to support , global frameworks aiming at setting transparent systems for extracting and trading natural resources and raw materials , such as the Forest Law Enforcement Governance and Trade and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative .
5.3 .
Trade policy EU trade policy contributes to encouraging third countries to respect , inter alia , human rights and good governance through bilateral trade relations and through tools such as the Generalised System of Preferences .
The Commission recently proposed a reshape of the Generalized System of Preferences , reinforcing the incentives for the respect of good governance standards through the adherence and implementation of key international conventions such as the UNCAC .
The Commission will continue to promote the inclusion of specific provisions in Free Trade Agreements on transparency in international government procurement , and in the content of World Trade Organization the extension to other WTO Parties of the Agreement on Government Procurement which contains provisions on enhanced transparency in international procurement , limiting the risk of corruption .
DECISION ( EU ) 2016 / 456 OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 4 March 2016 concerning the terms and conditions for European Anti-Fraud Office investigations of the European Central Bank , in relation to the prevention of fraud , corruption and any other illegal activities affecting the financial interests of the Union ( ECB / 2016 / 3 ) ( recast ) THE GOVERNING COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK , Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , Having regard to the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank , and in particular Article 12.3 thereof , Having regard to Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) and repealing Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 of the European Parliament and the Council and Council Regulation ( Euratom ) No 1074 / 1999 ( 1 ) , and in particular Article 4 ( 1 ) and ( 7 ) thereof , Whereas : ( 1 ) Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 provides that the European Anti-Fraud Office ( hereinafter the ‘ Office ’ ) is to initiate and conduct administrative fraud investigations ( hereinafter ‘ internal investigations ’ ) within the institutions , bodies , offices and agencies established by , or on the basis of , the Treaties for the purpose of fighting fraud , corruption and any other illegal activities affecting the financial interests of the Union .
To that end , it investigates serious matters relating to the discharge of professional duties constituting a dereliction of the obligations of officials and other servants of the Union liable to result in disciplinary or , as the case may be , criminal proceedings , or an equivalent failure to discharge obligations on the part of members of institutions and bodies , heads of offices and agencies or staff members of institutions , bodies , offices or agencies not subject to the Staff Regulations of Officials and the Conditions of Employment of other servants of the Union ( hereinafter the ‘ Staff Regulations ’ ) .
( 2 ) For the European Central Bank ( ECB ) such professional duties and obligations , in particular the obligations relating to professional conduct and professional secrecy , are laid down in ( a ) the Conditions of Employment for Staff of the European Central Bank , ( b ) the European Central Bank Staff Rules , ( c ) Annex IIb to the Conditions of Employment concerning the Conditions of Short-Term Employment , and ( d ) the European Central Bank Rules for Short-Term Employment , and further guidance is given in ( e ) the Code of Conduct for the members of the Governing Council ( 2 ) , ( f ) the Supplementary Code of Ethics Criteria for the members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank ( 3 ) , and ( g ) the Code of Conduct for the members of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank ( 4 ) ( together referred to hereinafter as the ‘ ECB conditions of employment ’ ) .
( 3 ) Article 4 ( 1 ) of Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 provides that in relation to protecting the Union &apos;s financial interests and fighting fraud and any other illegal activities affecting the financial interests of the Union , the Office ‘ shall carry out administrative investigations within the institutions , bodies , offices and agencies ’ in accordance with the conditions set out in Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 and in the decisions adopted by each institution , body , office or agency .
Article 4 ( 7 ) of Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 provides that each institution , body , office and agency is to adopt a decision which ‘ shall include , in particular , a rule concerning a duty on the part of officials , other servants , members of institutions or bodies , heads of offices or agencies , or staff members to cooperate with and supply information to the Office , while ensuring the confidentiality of the internal investigation ’ .
In accordance with Union case-law , the Office may open an investigation only on the basis of sufficiently serious suspicions ( 5 ) .
( 4 ) Pursuant to Recital 12 of Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 , investigations should be conducted in accordance with the Treaties , in particular Protocol No 7 on the privileges and immunities of the European Union , and should also respect the Staff Regulations , human rights and fundamental freedoms , in particular the principle of fairness , the right of persons involved to express their views on the facts concerning them and the principle that the conclusions of an investigation may be based solely on elements which have evidential value , as well as general principles common to the Member States and recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union , such as , for instance , the confidentiality of legal advice ( legal privilege ) .
To that end , the institutions , bodies , offices and agencies should lay down the terms and conditions under which internal investigations are to be conducted .
( 5 ) Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 ( 6 ) was adopted to lay down the terms and conditions under which internal investigations under Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 7 ) were to be conducted in the ECB .
In order to take into account that Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 has been repealed and replaced by Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 and that new ECB bodies have been established since the adoption of Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 , there is a need to revise the current legal framework .
( 6 ) Council Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 ( 8 ) established the Supervisory Board as an ECB internal body to plan and execute the specific tasks concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions conferred upon the ECB .
On the basis of Article 24 ( 1 ) and Article 25 ( 5 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 , the ECB established an Administrative Board of Review ( 9 ) and a Mediation Panel ( 10 ) .
Furthermore , on the basis of Articles 3 ( 1 ) and 143 ( 1 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 468 / 2014 of the European Central Bank ( ECB / 2014 / 17 ) ( 11 ) , the ECB established joint supervisory teams for the supervision of each significant supervised entity or significant supervised group and on-site inspection teams .
Subsequently , on the basis of Articles 9a and 9b of the Rules of Procedure of the European Central Bank ( 12 ) respectively , the ECB established an Ethics Committee ( 13 ) and an Audit Committee .
( 7 ) This Decision should apply to the members of joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams who are not subject to the ECB conditions of employment .
Members of staff of national competent authorities who are members of joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams fall within the ECB &apos;s sphere of control in matters related to their work on tasks conferred upon the ECB under Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 .
Article 6 ( 1 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 provides that the ECB is responsible for the effective and consistent functioning of the Single Supervisory Mechanism ( SSM ) .
Articles 6 ( 1 ) and 146 ( 1 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 468 / 2014 ( ECB / 2014 / 17 ) provide that the members of joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams are subject to the instructions of the respective team coordinator .
These provisions are based on Article 6 ( 7 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 , which requires the ECB to adopt a framework to organise the practical arrangements for the implementation of the cooperation within the SSM .
( 8 ) In adopting this Decision , it is incumbent on the ECB to justify any restrictions on internal investigations affecting the specific tasks and duties entrusted to the ECB by Articles 127 and 128 of the Treaty and by Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 .
Such restrictions should ensure the confidentiality necessary for certain ECB information and give effect to the legislator &apos;s intention of reinforcing the fight against fraud .
Other than for these specific tasks and duties , the ECB should be treated , also for the purposes of this Decision , as a public entity similar to other Union institutions and bodies .
( 9 ) In exceptional cases , the circulation outside the ECB of some of the confidential information it holds in order to perform its tasks could seriously undermine the ECB &apos;s functioning .
In such cases , the decision on granting the Office access to information or transmitting information to it should be taken by the Executive Board .
Access should be granted to information that is more than one year old in areas such as monetary policy decisions , or operations related to the management of foreign reserves and interventions on foreign exchange markets .
Restrictions in other areas , such as in relation to information concerning the tasks conferred upon the ECB by Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 , data received by the ECB from national competent authorities regarding the stability of the financial system or individual credit institutions , and information regarding the security features and technical specifications of current and future euro banknotes , should not be limited to specific periods of time .
Although this Decision should limit to certain specific areas of activity the scope of information whose circulation outside the ECB could seriously undermine the ECB &apos;s functioning , it is necessary to provide for the possibility of adapting the Decision to cover unforeseen developments to ensure that the ECB continues to fulfil the tasks assigned to it by the Treaty .
( 10 ) This Decision should take into account that the members of the ECB &apos;s Governing Council and General Council who are not also members of the ECB &apos;s Executive Board exercise national functions in addition to their functions within the European System of Central Banks , and that the members of the ECB &apos;s Supervisory Board , Mediation Panel , joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams who are representatives of the national competent authorities of the participating Member States also exercise national functions in addition to their tasks under Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 .
Exercising such national functions is a matter for national law , which falls outside the scope of the internal investigations of the Office .
This Decision should therefore only apply to the professional activities of such persons undertaken in their capacity as members of the ECB &apos;s Governing Council , General Council , Supervisory Board , Mediation Panel , joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams .
( 11 ) This Decision should also take into account that the external members of the ECB &apos;s Administrative Board of Review , Audit Committee and Ethics Committee may exercise other functions in addition to their mandates .
Exercising such functions falls outside the scope of the internal investigations of the Office .
This Decision should therefore only apply to the professional activities of such persons undertaken in their capacity as members of the ECB &apos;s Administrative Board of Review , Audit Committee and Ethics Committee .
( 12 ) Article 37.1 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ( hereinafter the ‘ Statute of the ESCB ’ ) provides that members of the governing bodies and the staff of the ECB are required , even after their duties have ceased , not to disclose information of the kind covered by the obligation of professional secrecy .
Article 27 ( 1 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 provides that members of the Supervisory Board , staff of the ECB and staff seconded by participating Member States carrying out supervisory duties , even after their duties have ceased , are subject to the same professional secrecy requirements .
Article 22 ( 1 ) of Decision ECB / 2014 / 16 and Article 2 ( 4 ) of Decision ( EU ) 2015 / 433 ( ECB / 2014 / 59 ) respectively provide the same for members of the ECB &apos;s Administrative Board of Review and their alternates and for members of the ECB &apos;s Ethics Committee .
Paragraph 6 of the Audit Committee mandate ( 14 ) provides that the members of the Audit Committee shall not divulge any information of a confidential nature coming to their knowledge during the performance of their duties to persons or bodies outside the ECB / Eurosystem .
Under Article 10 of Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 , the Office and its employees are subject to the same conditions of confidentiality and professional secrecy as those applying to ECB staff under the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB conditions of employment .
( 13 ) Under Article 7 ( 3 ) of Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 , the national competent authorities , in conformity with national rules , give the necessary assistance to enable the staff of the Office to fulfil their tasks effectively .
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the ECB are signatories to a Headquarters Agreement dated 18 September 1998 ( 15 ) , which implements Protocol No 7 on the privileges and immunities of the European Union in respect of the ECB and contains provisions regarding the inviolability of the ECB &apos;s premises , archives , and communications , and on the diplomatic privileges and immunities of the members of the ECB &apos;s Executive Board .
( 14 ) Given the replacement of Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 by Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 and the substantial number of amendments necessary , Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 should be repealed and replaced by this Decision , HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION : Article 1 Scope of application This Decision applies to : members of the ECB &apos;s Governing and General Councils , in matters related to their function as members of these ECB decision-making bodies , members of the ECB &apos;s Executive Board , members of the ECB &apos;s Supervisory Board , in matters related to their function as members of that body , members of the ECB &apos;s Administrative Board of Review , in matters related to their function as members of that body , members of the ECB &apos;s Mediation Panel , in matters related to their function as members of that body , members of the ECB &apos;s Audit Committee , in matters related to their function as members of that body , members of the ECB &apos;s Ethics Committee , in matters related to their function as members of that body , members of the governing bodies or any member of staff of the national central banks or national competent authorities , who participate in the meetings of the ECB &apos;s Governing and General Councils and Supervisory Board as alternates and / or accompanying persons in matters related to that function ( hereinafter jointly referred to as ‘ participants in the decision-making and other bodies ’ ) , and permanent or temporary ECB members of staff , who are subject to the ECB conditions of employment , persons working for the ECB other than on the basis of an employment contract , including members of staff of national competent authorities who are members of joint supervisory teams and on-site inspection teams , in matters related to their work for the ECB ( hereinafter jointly referred to as ‘ relevant persons ’ ) .
Article 2 Duty to cooperate with the Office Without prejudice to the relevant provisions of the Treaties , Protocol No 7 on the privileges and immunities of the European Union , the Statute of the ESCB and the Staff Regulations , with full respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and the general principles common to the Member States and subject to the procedures laid down in Regulation ( EU , Euratom ) No 883 / 2013 and to the rules laid down in this Decision , participants in the decision-making and other bodies and relevant persons shall cooperate with and supply information to the Office , while ensuring the confidentiality of an internal investigation .
Article 3 Duty to report any information about illegal activity 1 .
Relevant persons who become aware of information which gives rise to a suspicion of the existence of possible cases of fraud , corruption or any other illegal activity affecting the Union &apos;s financial interests shall without delay provide either the Director Internal Audit , the senior manager in charge of their business area , or the member of the Executive Board who is primarily responsible for their business area with such information .
The latter persons shall without delay transmit the information to the Director-General Secretariat .
Relevant persons must in no way suffer inequitable or discriminatory treatment as a result of having communicated the information referred to in this Article .
2 .
Participants in the decision-making and other bodies who become aware of information as referred to in paragraph 1 shall inform the Director-General Secretariat or the President .
3 .
When the Director-General Secretariat or , where appropriate , the President receives information in accordance with paragraphs 1 or 2 , they shall , subject to Article 4 of this Decision , transmit it without delay to the Office and inform the Directorate Internal Audit and , where appropriate , the President .
4 .
In cases in which a participant in the decision-making and other bodies or a relevant person has concrete information supporting the possible existence of a case of fraud or corruption or any other illegal activity within the meaning of paragraph 1 , and , at the same time , has justified reasons to consider that the procedure provided for in the above paragraphs would prevent in that specific case the proper reporting of such information to the Office , they may report directly to the Office without being subject to Article 4 .
Article 4 Cooperation with the Office with regard to sensitive information 1 .
In exceptional cases , in which the circulation of certain information outside the ECB could seriously undermine the ECB &apos;s functioning , the decision on whether to grant the Office access to such information or to transmit such information to it shall be taken by the Executive Board .
This shall apply to : information concerning monetary policy decisions , or operations related to the management of foreign reserves and interventions on foreign exchange markets , provided that such information is less than one year old ; information concerning the tasks conferred upon the ECB by Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 ; data received by the ECB from the national competent authorities regarding the stability of the financial system or individual credit institutions ; and information concerning the euro banknotes &apos; security features and technical specifications .
2 .
Any such decision of the Executive Board shall take all relevant factors into account , such as the degree of sensitivity of the information required by the Office for the investigation , its importance for the investigation and the seriousness of the suspicion as presented by the Office , by the participant in the decision-making and other bodies or the relevant person to the President , and the degree of risk for the ECB &apos;s future functioning .
If access is not granted , the decision shall state the reasons for this .
With regard to data that the ECB receives on the stability of the financial system or individual credit institutions , the Executive Board may decide not to grant the Office access if it or the relevant national competent authority considers that disclosing the information concerned would place the stability of the financial system or the individual credit institution at risk .
3 .
In very exceptional cases that concern information related to a particular area of ECB activity , of equivalent sensitivity to the categories of information referred to in paragraph 1 , the Executive Board may provisionally decide not to grant the Office access to such information .
Paragraph 2 shall apply to such decisions , which shall be valid for a maximum of six months .
Thereafter , the Office shall be granted access to the information concerned , unless the Governing Council has in the meantime amended the present Decision by adding the category of information concerned to the categories covered by paragraph 1 .
Article 5 Assistance from the ECB in internal investigations 1 .
When initiating an internal investigation of the ECB , the Office &apos;s agents shall be granted access to the ECB &apos;s premises by the manager in charge of ECB security upon production of a written authorisation issued by the Director-General of the Office , which indicates the following : ( a ) the agents &apos; identity and job title in the Office ; ( b ) the subject matter and purpose of the investigation ; ( c ) the legal bases for conducting the investigation and the investigative powers arising from those bases .
The President , the Vice-President and the Director Internal Audit shall be informed immediately .
2 .
The Directorate Internal Audit shall assist the Office in the practical organisation of investigations .
3 .
Participants in the decision-making and other bodies and relevant persons shall supply any requested information to the Office &apos;s agents who are conducting an investigation , unless the requested information could be sensitive within the meaning of Article 4 , in which case the Executive Board shall decide whether or not the information should be provided .
The Directorate Internal Audit shall record all information supplied .
Article 6 Informing interested parties 1 .
Where the possible implication of a participant in the decision-making and other bodies or a relevant person in fraud , corruption and any other illegal activity within the meaning of Article 3 ( 1 ) emerges , the interested party shall be informed rapidly provided that this will not be harmful to the investigation ( 16 ) .
In any event , conclusions referring by name to a participant in the decision-making or other bodies or a relevant person may not be drawn without the interested party being given the opportunity to express their views on all the facts relating to them , including any evidence existing against them .
Interested parties have the right to remain silent , to refrain from incriminating themselves and to seek personal legal assistance .
2 .
In cases necessitating the maintenance of absolute secrecy for the purpose of the investigation and / or requiring the use of investigative procedures falling within the remit of a national judicial authority , compliance with the obligation to invite a participant in the decision-making or other bodies or a relevant person to express their views may be deferred for a limited period in agreement with the President or Vice-President .
Article 7 Information on the closing of an investigation with no further action taken If , following an internal investigation , no case can be made against a participant in the decision-making and other bodies or a relevant person against whom allegations have been made , the internal investigation shall be closed , with no further action taken , by decision of the Director-General of the Office , who shall inform the participant in the decision-making and other bodies or relevant person thereof in writing .
Article 8 Waiver of immunity Any request from a national police or judicial authority for waiver of applicable immunity from judicial proceedings of a participant in the decision-making and other bodies or a relevant person in possible cases of fraud , corruption and any other illegal activity affecting the financial interests of the Union shall be transmitted to the Director-General of the Office for his opinion .
The Governing Council shall decide on any relevant waiver as far as participants in the decision-making and other bodies are concerned , and the Executive Board shall decide on any relevant waiver as far as relevant persons are concerned .
Article 9 Entry into force and repeal 1 .
This Decision shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
2 .
Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 is repealed with effect from the twentieth day following the publication of this Decision in the Official Journal of the European Union .
3 .
References to Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 shall be construed as references to this Decision .
Done at Frankfurt am Main , 4 March 2016 .
The President of the ECB Mario DRAGHI ( 1 ) OJ L 248 , 18.9.2013 , p . 1 .
( 2 ) Code of Conduct for the members of the Governing Council ( OJ C 123 , 24.5.2002 , p . 9 ) .
( 3 ) Supplementary Code of Ethics Criteria for the members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank ( in accordance with Article 11.3 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Central Bank ) ( OJ C 104 , 23.4.2010 , p . 8 ) .
( 4 ) Code of Conduct for the Members of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank ( OJ C 93 , 20.3.2015 , p . 2 ) .
( 5 ) Commission of the European Communities v European Central Bank , C-11 / 00 , ECLI : EU : C : 2003 : 395 .
( 6 ) Decision ECB / 2004 / 11 of 3 June 2004 concerning the terms and conditions for European Anti-Fraud Office investigations of the European Central Bank , in relation to the prevention of fraud , corruption and any other illegal activities detrimental to the European Communities &apos; financial interests and amending the Conditions of Employment for Staff of the European Central Bank ( OJ L 230 , 30.6.2004 , p . 56 ) .
( 7 ) Regulation ( EC ) No 1073 / 1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 1999 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) ( OJ L 136 , 31.5.1999 , p . 1 ) .
( 8 ) Council Regulation ( EU ) No 1024 / 2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions ( OJ L 287 , 29.10.2013 , p . 63 ) .
( 9 ) Decision ECB / 2014 / 16 of 14 April 2014 concerning the establishment of an Administrative Board of Review and its Operating Rules ( OJ L 175 , 14.6.2014 , p . 47 ) .
( 10 ) Regulation ( EU ) No 673 / 2014 of the European Central Bank of 2 June 2014 concerning the establishment of a Mediation Panel and its Rules of Procedure ( ECB / 2014 / 26 ) ( OJ L 179 , 19.6.2014 , p . 72 ) .
( 11 ) Regulation ( EU ) No 468 / 2014 of the European Central Bank of 16 April 2014 establishing the framework for cooperation within the Single Supervisory Mechanism between the European Central Bank and national competent authorities and with national designated authorities ( SSM Framework Regulation ) ( ECB / 2014 / 17 ) ( OJ L 141 , 14.5.2014 , p . 1 ) .
( 12 ) Decision ECB / 2004 / 2 of 19 February 2004 adopting the Rules of Procedure of the European Central Bank ( OJ L 80 , 18.3.2004 , p . 33 ) .
( 13 ) Decision ( EU ) 2015 / 433 of the European Central Bank of 17 December 2014 concerning the establishment of an Ethics Committee and its Rules of Procedure ( ECB / 2014 / 59 ) ( OJ L 70 , 14.3.2015 , p . 58 ) .
( 14 ) Available on the ECB &apos;s website at www.ecb.europa.eu ( 15 ) Federal Official Journal ( Bundesgesetzblatt ) No 45 , 1998 of 27.10.1998 and No 12 , 1999 of 6.5.1999 .
( 16 ) Article 20 of Regulation ( EC ) No 45 / 2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data ( OJ L 8 , 12.1.2001 , p . 1 ) applies to any restriction on information to be given to data subjects in the event of data processing .
Council Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA of 22 July 2003 on combating corruption in the private sector Official Journal L 192 , 31 / 07 / 2003 P. 0054 - 0056 Council Framework Decision 2003 / 568 / JHA of 22 July 2003 on combating corruption in the private sector THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION , Having regard to the Treaty on European Union , and in particular Article 29 , Article 31 ( 1 ) ( e ) and Article 34 ( 2 ) ( b ) thereof , Having regard to the initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark , Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament , Whereas : ( 1 ) Along with globalisation , recent years have brought an increase in cross-border trade in goods and services .
Any corruption in the private sector within a Member State is thus not just a domestic problem but also a transnational problem , most effectively tackled by means of a European Union joint action .
( 2 ) On 27 September 1996 the Council adopted the Act drawing up a Protocol to the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities &apos; Financial Interests .
The Protocol , which entered into force on 17 October 2002 , contains definitions of and harmonised penalties for offences of corruption .
( 3 ) On 26 May 1997 the Council approved a Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union .
( 4 ) On 22 December 1998 , the Council also adopted Joint Action 98 / 742 / JHA on corruption in the private sector .
In connection with the adoption of that Joint Action , the Council issued a statement to the effect that it agreed that the Joint Action represents the first step at European Union level towards combating such corruption , and that additional measures will be implemented at a later stage in the light of the outcome of the assessment which is to take place pursuant to Article 8 ( 2 ) of the Joint Action .
A report on Member States &apos; transposition of that Joint Action into national law is not yet available .
( 5 ) On 13 June 2002 the Council adopted Framework Decision 2002 / 584 / JHA on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between the Member States , in which corruption is included in the list of offences falling within the scope of the European arrest warrant , in respect of which prior verification of double criminality is not required .
( 6 ) Under Article 29 of the Treaty on European Union , it is the Union &apos;s objective to provide citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom , security and justice , an objective to be achieved by preventing and combating crime , organised or otherwise , including corruption .
( 7 ) According to point 48 of the conclusions of the European Council meeting in Tampere on 15 and 16 October 1999 , corruption is an area of particular relevance in establishing minimum rules on what constitutes a criminal offence in Member States and the penalties applicable .
( 8 ) An OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions was approved at a negotiating conference on 21 November 1997 , and the Council of Europe has also approved a Criminal Law Convention on Corruption , which opened for signature on 27 January 1999 .
That Convention is accompanied by an Agreement establishing the Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) .
Negotiations have also been opened for a UN Convention on combating corruption .
( 9 ) Member States attach particular importance to combating corruption in both the public and the private sector , in the belief that in both those sectors it poses a threat to a law-abiding society as well as distorting competition in relation to the purchase of goods or commercial services and impeding sound economic development .
In that context the Member States which have not yet ratified the European Union Convention of 26 May 1997 and the Council of Europe Convention of 27 January 1999 will consider how to do so as soon as possible .
( 10 ) The aim of this Framework Decision is in particular to ensure that both active and passive corruption in the private sector are criminal offences in all Member States , that legal persons may also be held responsible for such offences , and that these offences incur effective , proportionate and dissuasive penalties , HAS ADOPTED THIS FRAMEWORK DECISION : Article 1 Definitions For the purposes of this Framework Decision : &quot; legal person &quot; means any entity having such status under the applicable national law , except for States or other public bodies acting in the exercise of State authority and for public international organisations , &quot; breach of duty &quot; shall be understood in accordance with national law .
The concept of breach of duty in national law should cover as a minimum any disloyal behaviour constituting a breach of a statutory duty , or , as the case may be , a breach of professional regulations or instructions , which apply within the business of a person who in any capacity directs or works for a private sector entity .
Article 2 Active and passive corruption in the private sector 1 .
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the following intentional conduct constitutes a criminal offence , when it is carried out in the course of business activities : ( a ) promising , offering or giving , directly or through an intermediary , to a person who in any capacity directs or works for a private-sector entity an undue advantage of any kind , for that person or for a third party , in order that that person should perform or refrain from performing any act , in breach of that person &apos;s duties ; ( b ) directly or through an intermediary , requesting or receiving an undue advantage of any kind , or accepting the promise of such an advantage , for oneself or for a third party , while in any capacity directing or working for a private-sector entity , in order to perform or refrain from performing any act , in breach of one &apos;s duties .
2 .
Paragraph 1 applies to business activities within profit and non-profit entities .
3 .
A Member State may declare that it will limit the scope of paragraph 1 to such conduct which involves , or could involve , a distortion of competition in relation to the purchase of goods or commercial services .
4 .
Declarations referred to in paragraph 3 shall be communicated to the Council at the time of the adoption of this Framework Decision and shall be valid for five years as from 22 July 2005 .
5 .
The Council shall review this Article in due time before 22 July 2010 with a view to considering whether it shall be possible to renew declarations made under paragraph 3 .
Article 3 Instigation , aiding and abetting Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that instigating , aiding and abetting the conduct referred to in Article 2 constitute criminal offences .
Article 4 Penalties and other sanctions 1 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the conduct referred to in Articles 2 and 3 is punishable by effective , proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties .
2 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the conduct referred to in Article 2 is punishable by a penalty of a maximum of at least one to three years of imprisonment .
3 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures in accordance with its constitutional rules and principles to ensure that where a natural person in relation to a certain business activity has been convicted of the conduct referred to in Article 2 , that person may , where appropriate , at least in cases where he or she had a leading position in a company within the business concerned , be temporarily prohibited from carrying on this particular or comparable business activity in a similar position or capacity , if the facts established give reason to believe there to be a clear risk of abuse of position or of office by active or passive corruption .
Article 5 Liability of legal persons 1 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that legal persons can be held liable for offences referred to in Articles 2 and 3 committed for their benefit by any person , acting either individually or as part of an organ of the legal person , who has a leading position within the legal person , based on : ( a ) a power of representation of the legal person ; ( b ) an authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person ; or ( c ) an authority to exercise control within the legal person .
2 .
Apart from the cases provided for in paragraph 1 , each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that a legal person can be held liable where the lack of supervision or control by a person referred to in paragraph 1 has made possible the commission of an offence of the type referred to in Articles 2 and 3 for the benefit of that legal person by a person under its authority .
3 .
Liability of a legal person under paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not exclude criminal proceedings against natural persons who are involved as perpetrators , instigators or accessories in an offence of the type referred to in Articles 2 and 3 .
Article 6 Penalties for legal persons 1 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that a legal person held liable pursuant to Article 5 ( 1 ) is punishable by effective , proportionate and dissuasive penalties , which shall include criminal or non-criminal fines and may include other penalties such as : ( a ) exclusion from entitlement to public benefits or aid ; ( b ) temporary or permanent disqualification from the practice of commercial activities ; ( c ) placing under judicial supervision ; or ( d ) a judicial winding-up order .
2 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that a legal person held liable pursuant to Article 5 ( 2 ) is punishable by penalties or measures which are effective , proportionate and dissuasive .
Article 7 Jurisdiction 1 .
Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to establish its jurisdiction with regard to the offences referred to in Articles 2 and 3 , where the offence has been committed : ( a ) in whole or in part within its territory ; ( b ) by one of its nationals ; or ( c ) for the benefit of a legal person that has its head office in the territory of that Member State .
2 .
Any Member State may decide that it will not apply the jurisdiction rules in paragraph 1 ( b ) and ( c ) , or will apply them only in specific cases or circumstances , where the offence has been committed outside its territory .
3 .
Any Member State which , under its domestic law , does not as yet surrender its own nationals shall take the necessary measures to establish its jurisdiction with regard to the offences referred to in Articles 2 and 3 , when committed by its own nationals outside its territory .
4 .
Member States which decide to apply paragraph 2 shall inform the General Secretariat of the Council and the Commission accordingly , where appropriate with an indication of the specific cases or circumstances in which the decision applies .
Article 8 Repeal Joint Action 98 / 742 / JHA shall be repealed .
Article 9 Implementation 1 .
Member States shall take the necessary measures to comply with the provisions of this Framework Decision before 22 July 2005 .
2 .
By the same date , Member States shall transmit to the General Secretariat of the Council and the Commission the text of the provisions transposing into their national law the obligations imposed on them under this Framework Decision .
On the basis of a report established using this information and a written report from the Commission , the Council shall before 22 October 2005 assess the extent to which Member States have complied with the provisions of this Framework Decision .
Article 10 Territorial application This Framework Decision shall apply to Gibraltar .
Article 11 Entry into force This Framework Decision shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
Done at Brussels , 22 July 2003 .
For the Council The President G. Alemanno COUNCIL DECISION ( EU ) 2016 / 63 of 15 January 2016 concerning the accession of Croatia to the Convention drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 ( 2 ) ( c ) of the Treaty on European Union on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION , Having regard to the Treaty on European Union , Having regard to the Treaty of Accession of Croatia , Having regard to the Act of Accession of Croatia , and in particular Article 3 ( 5 ) thereof , Having regard to the recommendation from the European Commission , Having regard to the opinion of the European Parliament ( 1 ) , Whereas : ( 1 ) The Convention drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 ( 2 ) ( c ) of the Treaty on European Union on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union ( 2 ) ( ‘ the Convention against corruption involving officials ’ ) was signed on 26 May 1997 and entered into force on 28 September 2005 .
( 2 ) Article 3 ( 4 ) of the Act of Accession of Croatia ( ‘ the Act of Accession ’ ) provides that Croatia accedes to the conventions and protocols concluded between the Member States , listed in Annex I to the Act of Accession , which comprises , inter alia , the Convention against corruption involving officials .
They are to enter into force in relation to Croatia on the date determined by the Council .
( 3 ) In accordance with Article 3 ( 5 ) of the Act of Accession , the Council is to decide to make all adjustments required by reason of accession to those conventions and protocols , HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION : Article 1 The Convention against corruption involving officials shall enter into force for Croatia on the first day of the first month following the date of publication of this Decision .
Article 2 The text of the Convention against corruption involving officials drawn up in the Croatian language ( 3 ) shall be authentic under the same conditions as the other texts of the Convention against corruption involving officials .
Article 3 This Decision shall take effect on the date following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union .
Done at Brussels , 15 January 2016 .
For the Council The President J.R.V.A.
DIJSSELBLOEM Explanatory Report on the Second Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests ( Text approved by the Council on 12 March 1999 ) Official Journal C 091 , 31 / 03 / 1999 P. 0008 - 0019 EXPLANATORY REPORT on the Second Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests ( Text approved by the Council on 12 March 1999 ) ( 1999 / C 91 / 02 ) I.
INTRODUCTION The Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests was drawn up by the Council and signed by the representatives of the Governments of the Member States on 26 July 1995 .
This Convention ( hereinafter referred to as the &apos; Convention` or &apos; Fraud Convention` ) constitutes the first agreement under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union ( TEU ) dealing with fraud affecting the European Communities &apos; budget .
A First Protocol to the Convention was drawn up and signed on 27 September 1996 .
It is primarily aimed at acts of corruption which involve national and Community officials and damage , or are likely to damage , the European Communities &apos; financial interests and will be referred to as the &apos; First` or &apos; Corruption Protocol` .
The Protocol on the interpretation , by way of preliminary rulings , by the Court of Justice of the European Communities , of the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests was drawn up and signed on 29 November 1996 .
This instrument allows Member States to accept , by a declaration made at the time of the signing of the Protocol or any time thereafter , the jurisdiction of the Court to give preliminary rulings on the interpretation of the Convention and the First Protocol .
Alongside the drawing up of the above instruments on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union , two instruments of particular interest in this context have been adopted by the European Community .
These are Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 2988 / 95 of 18 December 1995 on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests and Council Regulation ( Euratom , EC ) No 2185 / 96 of 11 November 1996 concerning on-the-spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to protect the European Communities &apos; financial interests against fraud and other irregularities .
In the act of the Council drawing up the Convention , the Council stressed that the Convention should be supplemented shortly afterwards by another legal instrument , in such a way as to improve the effectiveness of protection under criminal law of the European Communities &apos; financial interests .
The Commission presented a draft for a Second Protocol to the Fraud Convention in early 1996 .
It referred to the intention expressed by the Council when drawing up the Convention , as well as to the Council resolution of 6 December 1994 on the legal protection of the financial interests of the Communities .
In the resolution , the Council requested the elaboration of possibilities to impose sanctions on legal persons , as well as the extension of legislation concerning money laundering to the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests .
The Commission initiative and draft were taken over by the Italian Presidency of the Council and , by the end of that Presidency , the discussions on the draft were well advanced .
In June 1996 , the Italian Presidency consulted the European Parliament pursuant to Article K.6 of the Treaty on European Union and the Parliament gave its opinion in a resolution of 24 October 1996 .
Discussions continued under the Irish Presidency and finally under the Netherlands Presidency political agreement was reached on 26 May 1997 on the draft before the Council .
On 19 June 1997 , the act drawing up the Second Protocol was adopted by the Council and the Second Protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests was signed by the representatives of the Governments of the Member States .
As regards the legal basis for the Second Protocol , reference is made to the remarks under point II of the Explanatory report on the Convention .
The importance of finalising and implementing the Second Protocol is stressed in the action plan to combat organised crime , adopted by the Council on 28 April 1997 , which recommends that the Member States widen the scope of the criminalisation of money laundering , further improve and structure cooperation between the Commission and the Member States in the fight against fraud affecting the financial interests of the European Communities and money laundering linked thereto , introduce liability for legal persons involved in organised crime and collect relevant information with respect to legal persons in order to prevent the penetration of organised crime in the legitimate economy .
II .
COMMENTARY ON THE ARTICLES Article 1 Definitions 1.1 .
General remarks This introductory provision contains five definitions of terms used in the Second Protocol .
Besides defining the exact meaning of the terms for the purpose of the Second Protocol , the first three terms also establish the links between the Second Protocol and the Fraud Convention and the First Protocol thereto .
1.2 .
Paragraphs ( a ) and ( b ) These paragraphs formally establish the relationship between the Second Protocol and the Fraud Convention , providing that &apos; Convention` shall refer to the Fraud Convention and &apos; fraud` shall refer to the conduct described as such in that Convention .
1.3 .
Paragraph ( c ) Besides being related to the Fraud Convention , the Second Protocol is also related to the First Protocol thereto , the Corruption Protocol .
The link is emphasised by paragraph ( c ) , which states that , in the context of the Second Protocol , &apos; passive corruption` and &apos; active corruption` shall have the same meanings as in the First Protocol .
1.4 .
Paragraph ( d ) The Second Protocol states that a &apos; legal person` shall mean any entity having such status under the applicable national law , except for States or other public bodies in the exercise of State authority and for public international organisations .
In this context , &apos; national law` means the national law of the Member State taking measures against a legal person in accordance with the Second Protocol .
1.5 .
Paragraph ( e ) For the purpose of the Second Protocol , &apos; money laundering` is understood as the conduct defined as such in Council Directive 91 / 308 / EEC of 10 June 1991 on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering as far as the offences covered by the Fraud Convention and the First Protocol thereto are concerned .
As a result , under the Second Protocol money laundering refers to the proceeds of , at least , serious cases of fraud and the proceeds of active and passive corruption .
Where reference is made to the Directive , in the definition of money laundering , the expression &apos; property` used in the third indent of Article 1 of the Directive is defined in the fourth indent of the said Article 1 .
As a consequence , &apos; property` in the context of the Second Protocol means &apos; assets of every kind , whether corporeal or incorporeal , movable or immovable , tangible or intangible , and legal documents or instruments evidencing title to such assets` .
Article 2 Money laundering On the basis of this provision , in combination with Article 1 ( e ) , Member States are obliged to ensure that the criminal offence of money laundering in their national legislation also includes the offences of fraud , at least in serious cases , and of active and passive corruption as predicate offences .
This extension of the scope of money laundering was encouraged in the action plan to combat organised crime which recommends that the &apos; criminalisation of laundering of the proceeds of crime should be made as general as possible` ( Recommendation 26 ) .
In order to put this recommendation into practice , the Council adopted on 3 December 1998 a joint action on money laundering , the identification , tracing , freezing , seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and proceeds of crime , which obliges the Member States to provide for a broad list of predicate offences .
In its second report to the European Parliament and the Council on the implementation of the Money Laundering Directive , the Commission announced its intention to propose an extension to the scope of the Money Laundering Directive .
It should be noted that , in order to enable Member States to ratify the Second Protocol where they have not yet been able to implement such an extension , Article 18 ( 1 ) of the Second Protocol allows a temporary reservation regarding cases other than those related to serious cases of active and passive corruption to be made for a period of five years which may be renewed once .
Article 3 Liability of legal persons 3.1 .
General remarks On the basis of this provision , the law of the Member States must provide that legal persons can be held liable for fraud , active corruption and money laundering committed for their benefit .
Paragraph 1 contains the criteria according to which the legal person &apos;s liability must be established for offences committed by persons with certain leading positions , whereas paragraph 2 addresses the possibility of a legal person being held liable for offences committed by other persons within the legal person .
The third paragraph stresses that the liability of a legal person should not exclude the liability of the natural person involved in the commission of the offences for which the legal person is liable .
3.2 .
Paragraph 1 According to paragraph 1 , liability of a legal person for one of the offences mentioned exists if at least two complementary criteria are met : ( i ) the offence involved has been committed for the benefit of the legal person ; and ( ii ) the offence has been committed by a natural person who has a certain leading position within the legal person .
The first criterion creates a link between the offence and the legal person .
The offence must be committed for the benefit of the legal person .
The possible benefit may be directly financial ( e.g.
by obtaining the proceeds of EC fraud ) or otherwise ( e.g.
by receiving orders due to the corruption of an official ) .
It is not relevant whether the natural person who physically commits the offence is acting individually or as part of an organ of the legal person .
In the second criterion , a relationship is established between the physical offender and the legal person to be held liable for the offence .
It is further stated that the &apos; leading position` of the natural person may be derived from one or more of the elements mentioned within paragraph 1 , which vary from the rather formal to the rather substantial : a power of representation of the legal person , or an authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person , or an authority to exercise control within the legal person .
As a result , in order to implement the Second Protocol , Member States will have to insert all three elements in their domestic legislation as alternatives on which the leading position may be based .
As regards cases where the liability of a legal person would be based on the physical offender &apos;s authority to exercise control within a legal person , it should be noted that the term &apos; control` is to be understood in the way that the power of supervision over the legal person &apos;s management must be such as to ensure that the physical offender occupies a leading position within the legal person .
Authority to exercise control within the legal person may result in particular from responsibility for internal financial control and auditing or from membership of a controlling or supervisory body internal to the legal person , to the extent that these positions correspond to a leading position which implies a possibility of influencing the legal person &apos;s management .
Thus , the power of control vested in persons which implies no possibility of influencing the legal person &apos;s management does not count .
Paragraph 1 does not cover external persons auditing accounts of the legal person in question , for example persons from audit companies .
The legal person may also be held liable with respect to the involvement of the natural person referred to in paragraph 1 as an accessory or instigator in the offences , or in the attempted commission of fraud .
3.3 .
Paragraph 2 In addition to the cases covered by paragraph 1 , Article 3 ( 2 ) addresses the situation of an offence referred to in paragraph 1 being committed by a person in a position subordinate to the person in a leading position .
Member States are obliged to provide for measures against legal persons in such cases if the commission of the offence has been made possible by the lack of supervision or control by one of the persons in a leading position .
Thus , paragraph 2 does not necessarily imply an objective responsibility on the part of the legal person but the paragraph may be interpreted as being limited to covering cases where the legal person as such may be blamed for culpable behaviour of persons acting on its behalf .
See also point 4.3 .
3.4 .
Paragraph 3 Article 3 ( 3 ) provides that criminal proceedings against those natural persons who , de facto , committed the offence should not be excluded by the liability of the legal person .
As a result , measures being taken , for example against a company for whose benefit a fraud was committed by the general manager , shall not exclude criminal prosecution of the manager himself .
Article 4 Sanctions for legal persons 4.1 .
General remarks Article 4 addresses the issue of sanctions against legal persons held liable for the offences referred to in Article 3 .
It recognises the different forms of liability dealt with in the first two paragraphs of Article 3 , distinguishing the liability for an offence committed by a person in a leading position from that for an offence committed by a subordinate employee .
4.2 .
Paragraph 1 In its first paragraph , Article 4 obliges Member States to ensure that legal persons held liable for one of the offences covered by Article 3 ( 1 ) committed by a person in a leading position may be punished by &apos; effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions` , thus recalling the criteria used in Article 2 of the Fraud Convention and the case-law of the Court of Justice .
According to the Second Protocol , these sanctions must include fines of a criminal or non-criminal nature and may include other sanctions , some of which are suggested in the paragraph .
As for other sanctions , these could , for example , be additional measures such as the exclusion of a legal person from participation in a public tender , as suggested in the resolution of the European Parliament of 24 October 1996 .
4.3 .
Paragraph 2 Paragraph 2 states that the Member States must also ensure that effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions or measures apply to legal persons held liable for fraud , corruption and money laundering pursuant to Article 3 ( 2 ) , i.e.
in cases where the commission of the offence by a subordinate employee was made possible by insufficient supervision or control by a person in a leading position .
For the cases referred to in Articles 3 ( 2 ) and 4 ( 2 ) , Member States may choose the type and severity of the sanctions or measures , as long as they are effective , proportionate and dissuasive .
It should , therefore , be noted that while the measures to be taken under Article 3 ( 2 ) and 4 ( 2 ) may be criminal sanctions , administrative and civil law measures are possible as well .
Sanctions or measures contemplated in Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Second Protocol , even if they need not be provided for in the criminal law or administrative penal legislation of the Member States , should , where appropriate , have a certain punitive character in the sense of going beyond mere reparation of damages or restitution of wrongful enrichment .
Article 5 Confiscation In order to ensure effective cooperation in the fight against Community fraud and corruption related thereto , it is necessary that the legislation of the Member States allows similar minimum measures to be taken in similar cases regarding the seizure and the confiscation or removal of instruments and proceeds of fraud , active and passive corruption and money laundering .
The reference to removal of instruments and proceeds is intended to cover cases which do not necessarily involve confiscation ( for example civil law cases for the purpose of compensation of damages or restitution of the property concerned to its rightful owner ) .
The seizure , confiscation or removal measures which must be in place may concern the instruments used in order to commit fraud , active or passive corruption or money laundering , and the proceeds of these offences .
Moreover , these measures may also concern property the value of which corresponds to such proceeds .
In this context , the expression &apos; seizure` covers &apos; freezing` and &apos; seizure` as defined in Article 1 ( I ) of the UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances ( Vienna , 19 December 1988 ) .
Bona fide third parties should be protected regarding confiscation and removal of instruments and proceeds .
It follows from the second sentence of Article 5 , which provides that the said Member State will act in accordance with its national law , that the question of whether or not a third party is bona fide will be answered according to that law .
Article 6 Tax and customs duty offences This provision , which deals with non-invocation of the fiscal exception for the purpose of mutual assistance as far as the scope of the Second Protocol is concerned , supplements Article 5 ( 3 ) of the Fraud Convention .
Whereas the latter excludes the application of the fiscal exception in the context of extradition , Article 6 of the Second Protocol states that mutual legal assistance in criminal matters may not be refused for the mere reason of the offence being tax or duty related .
The provision in itself is an exception to Article 2 ( a ) of the European Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters ( Strasbourg , 20 April 1959 ) and , although several provisions similar to Article 6 already exist ( e.g.
in Article 1 of the Additional Protocol to the 1959 Convention ( Strasbourg , 17 March 1978 ) and Article 50 of the Schengen Implementation Convention ( Schengen , 14 June 1990 ) ) , it was decided that it should be included in the Second Protocol as well , as none of these instruments were ratified by all Member States at the time of the adoption of the act drawing up the Second Protocol .
As regards the scope of &apos; tax offences` in this context , this will cover revenue ( taxes and duties ) within the meaning of the Convention .
Article 7 Cooperation with the Commission of the European Communities 7.1 .
General remarks Article 7 and the Articles which follow it set out the provisions governing cooperation between the Member States and the Commission in the area of the Fraud Convention and the Protocols to it and lay down the obligations resulting from that cooperation for the Commission .
The Member States , as Contracting Parties to the Second Protocol , confer on the Commission a task implying certain commitments by the Commission , not only as regards its relations with the Member States but also as regards its relations with private individuals where data protection is concerned .
The Commission is prepared to carry out this task and it accepts the responsibility incumbent upon it under the relevant provisions of the Second Protocol .
Article 6 of the Fraud Convention provides general rules on cooperation between the Member States regarding cases of fraud detrimental to the European Communities &apos; financial interests .
That provision also applies to the Second Protocol pursuant to Article 12 ( 1 ) of the Second Protocol .
Article 10 of the Second Protocol lays down the principle of data transfer between the Member States and the Commission for the purposes of applying the Convention .
Article 7 of the Second Protocol follows on from these provisions .
It requires the Member States and the Commission to cooperate with each other in the fight against fraud , active and passive corruption and money laundering .
It makes it clear that not only the Member States , but also the Commission , have a role to play regarding cooperation in the fight against fraud , active and passive corruption and money laundering .
The Commission &apos;s role is related to its specific responsibilities and obligations in respect of implementation of the budget and combating fraud against the Communities &apos; financial interests under Articles 205 and 209a of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Article 7 further specifies the rules governing data transfers , which are vital to effective cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
7.2 .
Paragraph 1 ( a ) This paragraph provides for cooperation between the Member States and the Commission .
Alongside the Member States &apos; primary responsibility for investigations and prosecutions ( Article 6 of the Convention ) Article 7 ( 1 ) confers a technical and operational role on the Commission .
The text expresses the concept of partnership in the fight against fraud .
What is concerned here is fraud in the criminal sense .
The following situations are involved where at least two Member States are affected : cases where fraudulent acts are committed on two sides of an international border , cases where a fraudulent act is committed in one Member State but the perpetrators are nationals of more than one Member State or non-member country , cases where a fraudulent act is committed in one Member State but the evidence is spread over more than one Member State or non-member country , cases where the fruits of fraud and property liable to confiscation are to be found outside the country where the fraudulent act is committed , even outside the European Union , cases where , although individual fraudulent acts are committed within a national context , they constitute links in a chain of fraudulent acts organised transnationally .
These situations also apply to corruption and money laundering .
Provision is made for cooperation between the Member States and the Commission in all of them .
( b ) The Commission &apos;s role is further spelled out in the second subparagraph .
It is provided for the purposes of cooperation that the Commission shall lend its assistance .
Where fraudulent acts are committed in a single Member State , there may nonetheless be links with organised networks in several Member States .
Rapid and fruitful cooperation between the relevant authorities - whether at Member State or Community level - will be conducive to successful investigations and prosecution .
The role conferred on the Commission is defined by the word &apos; assistance` .
Assistance will depend on the circumstances and requirements of the individual case .
The objective is to add value to the investigations of the facts and to prosecution and conviction where the case is referred to the official national authorities , by ensuring that the necessary skills and know-how are available .
The concept will fall to be interpreted in the broadest sense , without restrictions .
The role conferred on the Commission is clearly without prejudice to the exercise of powers conferred on the Member States &apos; judicial authorities in criminal matters .
The Member States &apos; authorities have access to the full range of national and international legal instruments , including the Convention on the protection of the Communities &apos; financial interests and the Protocols to it , to enable them to act against fraud , particularly where organised financial crime is involved .
No change is made to the national and international legal instruments themselves ; the provision is solely for Commission assistance in their implementation .
Assistance may be in two forms - technical and operational - which must be distinguished .
( c ) Technical assistance corresponds to the value added by the Commission in all areas governed by Community rules .
The documentary and logistical expertise that it can make available in the fight against fraud are significant here .
But so are the full range of its strategic data that can be used to identify current trends regarding fraudulent activities , the typology of fraud perpetrators , both individual and organisations , as well as the risk analyses prompted by the vulnerability to fraud of certain areas of activity .
In logistical terms , the judicial and prosecuting authorities may well need access to the Commission &apos;s databases relating to potentially relevant business activities ; they cannot consult these without the Commission &apos;s assistance .
Technical assistance embraces other forms of support available from the Unit on Coordination of Fraud Prevention &apos;s ( UCLAF ) Criminal Expertise and Liaison Unit , which is experienced in technical legal matters extending to national systems .
All prosecuting authorities will thus have access to that expertise to help them prepare requests to be made to the judicial authorities of one or more other Member States .
( d ) Operational assistance relates specifically to on-the-ground activities to combat fraud , corruption and money laundering .
It covers all the contributions the Commission can make to enhancing the effectiveness of enforcement activities to facilitate coordination of investigations undertaken by the national authorities .
Clearly the investigations and prosecutions in the areas referred to in Article 7 are a matter for the Member States &apos; own competent ( judicial or other ) authorities .
But the Commission &apos;s operational assistance can be valuable for the sound performance of investigations , particularly as it can help to : identify and contact the relevant authorities and establish relations for the purposes of information and operations , thus linking the administrative and the criminal investigations , establish or facilitate direct contacts between the relevant authorities involved , organise meetings quickly between the relevant authorities , on request or when the need arises , promote and facilitate relations between the different relevant authorities in the relevant countries in cases of transnational organised fraud , provide the relevant national authorities with the help they need so as to enjoy the quickest and most efficient access to the results of investigations undertaken by the Commission and to the opportunities offered by international administrative cooperation , provide assistance to the relevant national authorities for the purpose of the full exploitation of the possibilities offered by international agreements on judicial cooperation .
This assistance may , where appropriate , include the provision of information for the purpose of the preparation of requests for judicial cooperation , facilitate requisite contacts with the relevant authorities in cases of organised international fraud so as to promote the application of Article 6 ( 2 ) of the Fraud Convention ( centralisation of prosecutions ) .
7.3 .
Paragraph 2 Paragraph 2 provides for exchange of information , subject to protection of the confidentiality of investigations and of personal data .
( a ) The purpose of paragraph 2 is to state that in principle there must be no barriers to the exchange of information between the Member States and the Commission , including between Member States via the Commission .
The information exchange presupposes a flow of information in two directions .
The aim of the information exchange is to facilitate evidence of the facts of a case and preventive or enforcement measures in cases of fraud , active and passive corruption and money laundering .
There may be an intensified administrative investigation where there is reason to expect real irregularities ; a coherent investigation strategy may also be developed .
The paragraph does not specify the types of information that may be exchanged .
There are no good reasons for restricting them .
Given the wide range of cooperation situations that may arise , information needs will relate to a whole series of practical possibilities depending on the individual case .
The concrete nature of the information will depend on progress in investigations at the time when cooperation commences and , of course , on the specific features of the case in which information is required as a basis for further action .
The information exchanged under paragraph 2 might , for instance , concern : the nature of the fraud and its legal context , the modus operandi , the persons or bodies corporate involved , and personal data more generally .
( b ) Paragraph 2 imposes two constraints on information exchanges : data protection and confidentiality of investigations .
Each individual situation will have to be assessed individually on the basis of the circumstances .
Specific provisions of the Second Protocol ( Articles 8 to 11 ) secure the protection of personal data in the information exchange process .
The national law of each Member State will apply to the confidentiality of investigations .
As regards the Commission , Community law provides for the principle of business secrecy ( Article 214 of the Treaty establishing the European Community ) .
Consideration should be given on a case-by-case basis to the specific features and requirements of transnational investigations regarding the Communities &apos; financial interests .
( c ) Article 7 ( 2 ) also allows a Member State which supplies information to set specific conditions concerning the use of the information , whether by the Commission or by another Member State to which the information may be passed .
A Member State may , for example , set out for its competent authorities general or specific provisions which may serve as a basis for specific conditions relating to the use of information which provide a level of protection equivalent to that provided in Directive 95 / 46 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and are consistent with the provisions of national law .
In so doing , the Member States should take account on a case-by-case basis of the specific features and requirements of transnational investigations regarding the Communities &apos; financial interests .
Article 8 Data protection responsibility for the Commission The Commission shall ensure that , in the context of the exchange of information under Article 7 ( 2 ) , it observes , as regards the processing of personal data , a level of protection equivalent to the level of protection set out in Directive 95 / 46 / EC .
A Commission statement entered in the Council minutes when that Directive was adopted stated that the Commission accepted the obligations flowing from the Directive .
The principles expressed in the recitals and the enacting provisions of that Directive will accordingly constitute the framework of legal reference for protection of all the data to which Article 7 applies .
The kind of assistance which the Commission will be able to render to the Member States , as described in the commentary on Article 7 , would imply the transfer by Member States of all kinds of data , including personal data , to the Commission and the processing by the latter of such data .
Since it is inevitable that the Commission will process such data by creating its own filing systems , it was felt necessary to introduce provisions in the Protocol to ensure the observance by the Commission of rules on the protection of personal data and the preservation of confidentiality .
These rules will define the conditions under which the processing of personal data by the Commission is lawful , including conditions relating to data quality and legitimacy of data processing , as well as the right of the data subject to have access to , object to or have corrections made to , his personal data .
Article 9 Publication of data protection rules The rules adopted concerning the obligations under Article 8 will be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities .
Data protection rules will thus have mandatory legal effect .
They will be part of Community data-protection law .
In this context it should be pointed out that according to Article 16 ( 4 ) of the Second Protocol , exchange of information by the Member States with the Commission under Article 7 ( 2 ) will be suspended if , and for as long as , the rules adopted in conformity with Article 8 have not yet been published in the Official Journal .
Article 10 Transfer of data to other Member States and third countries 10.1 .
General remarks This Article deals with the question under which conditions the Commission may pass on personal data obtained from a Member State pursuant to cooperation under Article 7 to other Member States or third States .
10.2 .
Paragraph 1 In principle , there are no barriers to the transfer of information to other Member States , taking into account investigation secrecy and subject to the observance of conditions which the providing Member State may have set as to the use of the information concerned either by the Commission or by Member States to which this information may be passed on .
Before information is transferred , the Member State which supplied the information must be informed of the intended transfer .
It thus has the opportunity to check the conditions ( Article 7 ( 2 ) ) in relation to the intended transfer of information and to check whether the information to be transferred is up to date and accurate .
The Member State should take into account the need for carrying out this verification without delay in order to avoid any unnecessary procedural complications concerning the transfer of information .
10.3 .
Paragraph 2 As regards the transfer of personal data by the Commission to third countries , the situation is different : The Commission may only transfer such data to a third country if the providing Member State has given its authorisation to do so .
For example , as is the case under Chapter IV of Directive 95 / 46 / EC , this permits the providing Member State to assess whether the level of protection afforded by the third State concerned in respect of these data is adequate .
Article 11 Supervisory authority This Article falls to be considered in conjunction with Article 28 of Directive 95 / 46 / EC , which provides that in each Member State &apos; one or more public authorities are responsible for monitoring the application within its territory of the provisions adopted by the Member States in pursuance of this Directive` .
Article 286 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , as renumbered by the Amsterdam Treaty , requires the European Parliament and the Council to establish by 1 January 1999 a Community data-protection supervisory authority .
Article 11 of the Second Protocol provides that that authority shall be competent to exercise the same function with respect to personal data held by the Commission by virtue of the Second Protocol .
Article 12 Relation to the Convention 12.1 .
Paragraph 1 Paragraph 1 refers to specific provisions of the Fraud Convention declaring them applicable to money laundering as referred to in Article 2 of the Second Protocol .
The relevant provisions of the Convention may be summarised as follows : Article 3 etablishes that business managers may be held criminally liable , Article 5 deals with extradition and the aut dedere aut judicare rule , Article 6 establishes the principle of close cooperation between Member States in cases of fraud against the European Communities &apos; financial interests .
These three principles apply without restriction to the conduct to which Article 2 refers .
12.2 .
Paragraph 2 Paragraph 2 provides that certain provisions of the Convention apply to the Second Protocol .
These provisions may be summarised as follows : Article 4 provides rules on jurisdiction regarding the offences concerned .
Declarations made pursuant to Article 4 ( 2 ) apply to the Second Protocol unless otherwise indicated at the time of ratification of the Second Protocol , Article 7 establishes the ne bis in idem rule , which is also applicable in matters coming under the Second Protocol .
Declarations made pursuant to Article 7 ( 2 ) apply to the Second Protocol unless otherwise indicated at the time of ratification of the Second Protocol .
It is to be noted that the enforcement of a sentence includes cases where enforcement is suspended on probation , Article 9 allows Member States to enact provisions of national law that are more demanding than those of the Convention .
The Second Protocol likewise constitutes a set of minimum standards , Article 10 establishes , inter alia , arrangements for the provision of information by Member States to the Commission , and it also applies in matters coming under the Second Protocol .
Article 13 Court of Justice 13.1 .
General remarks This Article specifies the jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Justice of the European Communities to settle disputes between Member States and between Member States and the Commission relating to the interpretation or application of the Second Protocol , as well as the jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Justice regarding preliminary rulings .
13.2 .
Paragraphs 1 and 2 Paragraph 1 deals with the conditions under which the Court of Justice is competent regarding disputes between Member States .
Paragraph 2 concerns disputes between Member States and the Commission .
These provisions of the Second Protocol reproduce , as far as possible , the wording of Article 8 of the Fraud Convention , and that of Article 8 of the First Protocol , in order to ensure consistency between the three instruments .
Detailed commentaries are to be found in the Explanatory report to the Convention .
13.3 .
Paragraph 3 Paragraph 3 provides that the Protocol of 29 November 1996 on the interpretation , by way of preliminary rulings , by the Court of Justice of the European Communities , of the Convention on the protection of the European Communities &apos; financial interests , applies to the Second Protocol .
That Protocol also applies to the Convention and the First Protocol .
Declarations made pursuant to the said Protocol are valid in respect of the Second Protocol unless otherwise indicated at the time of ratification of the Second Protocol .
Article 14 Non-contractual liability This Article confirms that action taken by the Commission under the Second Protocol will be governed by the rules of Community law on the Community &apos;s non-contractual liability , set out in Articles 215 and 178 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Since it cannot be excluded that activities of the Commission pursuant to the Second Protocol may give rise to claims for damages by individuals whose personal data are processed by the Commission , it was felt necessary to confirm that also in a case where the Commission acts within powers conferred on it otherwise than by the EC Treaty , it engages the non-contractual liability of the Community in accordance with the terms of Article 215 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
Moreover , it is clear that the Court of Justice of the European Communities has jurisdiction in disputes relating to compensation for damage caused by the Commission or its servants in the performance of their duties under the Second Protocol .
Article 15 Judicial control According to Article 22 of Directive 95 / 46 / EC , which deals with data protection , Member States shall provide for the right of every person to a judicial remedy for any breach of the rights guaranteed to him by the national law applicable to the processing of relevant data .
Such rights include a right of access , a right of rectification , erasure or blocking of data when they are incomplete , inaccurate or too old to remain stored and the right to have access to the supervisory authority .
The rules to be adopted pursuant to Article 8 of the Second Protocol will have to include provisions granting such rights to individuals in respect of personal data processed by the Commission .
Under Article 15 ( 1 ) , the Court of Justice of the European Communities is given jurisdiction to deal with applications from natural and legal persons against decisions ( which include refusals to take a decision ) taken by the Commission on the basis of the rules adopted by it pursuant to Article 8 .
It will also be possible for the Court of Justice to assess in this context whether the Commission has fully complied with its obligations under Article 8 .
The wording of Article 15 ( 1 ) draws largely on that of the fourth paragraph of Article 173 of the EC Treaty read also in conjunction with the second paragraph of said Article 173 .
The references in Article 15 ( 2 ) to several other provisions of the EC Treaty are intended to clarify : that the Council may decide , in accordance with the procedure of Article 168a ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , to confer jurisdiction on the Court of First Instance in cases covered by Article 15 ( 1 ) ; the time limits to be observed for bringing a case before the Court of Justice ( fifth paragraph of Article 173 ) ; the nature of the decision which the Court of Justice may take on an action brought before it ( first paragraph of Article 174 ) ; the legal effect of a decision of the Court of Justice for the Commission ( first and second paragraphs of Article 176 ) ; the legal effect of bringing an action before the Court of Justice ( Article 185 ) ; and that the Court of Justice is entitled to prescribe any interim measures it considers necessary ( Article 186 ) .
Article 16 Entry into force This Article concerns the entry into force of the Second Protocol which may not precede that of the Fraud Convention .
Article 17 Accession of new Member States This Article concerns the accession of new Member States of the European Union to the Second Protocol .
Article 18 Reservations 18.1 .
Paragraph 1 In some Member States , money laundering related to the proceeds of active and passive corruption is a criminal offence only as far as serious cases of corruption are involved .
In order to enable these Member States to ratify the Protocol without delay , they were given the possibility of making a reservation in this area .
To ensure that the necessity for such a reservation will be reconsidered on a regular basis , its validity will be limited to a period of five years from the date of notification that the Protocol has been adopted according to Article 16 ( 2 ) .
After five years , the reservation may be renewed once in order to remain valid .
As a result , after a maximum period of 10 years from the date of the notification of ratification by the last Member State , reservations made with regard to the scope of money laundering will cease to have effect .
18.2 .
Paragraph 2 From the beginning of the negotiations on the Second Protocol , the issue of liability and sanctions for legal persons have created problems for Austria , the concept of criminal liability for legal persons being unknown to its legislation .
Because the problem was considered of practical rather than of fundamental nature , it was clear that Austria would need more time to implement Articles 3 and 4 than the other Member States .
To ensure that this specific problem would not delay the eventual entry into force of the entire Protocol for all Member States , and to encourage Austria to adapt its legislation , it was given the possibility of making a five-year reservation on these two Articles .
Unlike the reservation referred to in Article 18 ( 1 ) , this reservation may not be renewed and will lose its validity five years after the Council act drawing up the Protocol was adopted , i.e.
on 19 June 2002 .
18.3 .
Paragraph 3 Since , according to Article 12 ( 2 ) , Articles 4 and 7 of the Fraud Convention also apply to the Second Protocol , reservations that were accepted under the scope of those provisions of the Convention must apply in the context of the Second Protocol as well .
Any of these reservations may be withdrawn at any time by notice given to the Secretary-General of the Council .
REPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE COUNCIL on the modalities of European Union participation in the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) on the modalities of European Union participation in the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) INTRODUCTION As called for by the Stockholm Programme , the Commission submits to the Council this Report on the modalities for the European Union to accede to the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) .
GRECO is the most inclusive existing anti-corruption monitoring mechanism at European level , with participation of all EU Member States .
GRECO has had an important role in setting certain minimum European standards for a legal and institutional framework to combat corruption .
Yet corruption still poses serious problems in some Member States and effective results are not achieved consistently across the EU .
This reinforces the Commission &apos;s belief that political engagement to fight corruption remains uneven across the EU .
The Communication on an EU policy against corruption recommends EU participation in GRECO , together with the establishment of an EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism .
This should provide the potential to stimulate political will among Member States and render the existing legal and institutional framework more effective .
This Report defines the main objectives of reinforced cooperation between the EU and GRECO and analyses possible ways and benefits for EU &apos;s participating in the work of GRECO .
ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF GRECO GRECO was set up in 1999 by the Council of Europe , to &apos; improve the capacity of its members to fight corruption by following up , through a dynamic process of mutual evaluation and peer pressure , compliance with their undertakings in this field &apos; .
GRECO now has 49 members ( 48 European states and the United States of America ) .
The work of GRECO is governed by its Statute and Rules of Procedure .
Each member appoints up to two representatives in plenary meetings with the right to vote .
Members also provide GRECO with a list of experts available to carry out evaluations .
Evaluations of GRECO members are divided into rounds and are carried out against the standards set out in the Twenty Guiding Principles for the Fight against Corruption , the Civil Law Convention on Corruption and the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption with its Additional Protocol .
GRECO ’ s first evaluation round took place in 2000-2002 and covered the independence , specialisation and means of national bodies engaged in preventing and fighting corruption , as well as the immunities of public officials .
The second evaluation round , conducted in 2003-2006 , focused on the seizure and confiscation of corruption proceeds , the prevention and detection of corruption in public administration , and the prevention and fighting of corruption in the private sector .
The third evaluation round , started in January 2007 , is still ongoing .
It covers the criminalisation of offences in accordance with the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption and political party financing .
Evaluation reports are issued after discussion with the state evaluated and then debated and endorsed by the plenary .
They are as a rule confidential , but may be published with the consent of the evaluated state .
Each report comprises recommendations the country is requested to comply with in a certain period of time ( e.g.
18 months ) .
A compliance procedure is conducted to check the follow-up of the recommendations and ends with the issuing of compliance reports , possibly with addenda .
ADDED VALUE OF EU PARTICIPATION IN THE WORK OF GRECO The 2007 Memorandum of Understanding between the Council of Europe and the European Union stipulates that legal cooperation covering the rule of law ( including fight against corruption ) between the two parties should be further developed to ensure coherence between EU law and Council of Europe conventions , although this does not prevent the EU from adopting more far-reaching rules .
EU participation in GRECO was already outlined as a key element of EU anti-corruption policy in the Communication of 28 May 2003 .
Following the adoption of the 2003 Communication , different possibilities for participation were explored against the legal competences of the EU under the Treaty on the European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Community .
Given the then limited Community competence with regard to the Council of Europe &apos;s Civil and Criminal Law Conventions on Corruption , a decision had to be postponed until the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty .
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) provides a more streamlined EU competence on anti-corruption and paves the way for a reinforced EU anti-corruption policy , including participation in the work of GRECO .
Moreover , the path opened by EU accession to the UN Convention against Corruption ( UNCAC ) would be strengthened by a decision to join the European regional monitoring mechanism .
The main deficiency of anti-corruption policies in the EU-27 is the effective implementation of the existing framework .
GRECO has prompted some action in the EU Member States through its monitoring process , notably in areas less regulated at international level ( e.g.
financing of political parties ) .
However , GRECO &apos;s capacity to generate the necessary political will to adopt and maintain robust anti-corruption measures has certain limitations .
Also , GRECO &apos;s capacity to signal systemic problems generated by corruption has on some occasions proven rather weak .
The EU &apos;s active participation in GRECO &apos;s work may thus bring benefits to both organisations , combining GRECO expertise in monitoring anti-corruption efforts and the political role of EU institutions towards an effective enforcement of anti-corruption policies in the EU-27 .
To this end , the Commission will set up an EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism .
The EU &apos;s participation in GRECO will dovetail the new EU mechanism .
Moreover , the EU &apos;s participation in preparing GRECO evaluations may also contribute to improve the methodology and outcome of these evaluations .
Within the EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism the Commission will draw on input from GRECO and other relevant sources including information obtained within the framework of the OECD &apos;s Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Officials in International Business Transactions ( Anti-Bribery Convention ) and the UN Convention against Corruption .
In the light of the above , the following specific objectives would be most relevant for EU participation in GRECO : Involvement in the country visits leading to evaluations of EU Member States and / or candidate countries and potential candidates , should the latter agree ; Making suggestions on draft evaluation reports and participation in GRECO plenary debates on the evaluation / compliance reports for EU Member States and / or the candidate countries and potential candidates , should the latter agree ; Association with the work of GRECO &apos;s Bureau , which has an important role in preparing evaluations and drafting the reports ; Contribution to GRECO &apos;s budget ; Comparative analysis to be carried out by GRECO on the basis of the existing evaluation and compliance reports on the EU Member States as input for the future EU Anti-Corruption Report ; Identifying outstanding GRECO recommendations of relevance for the EU , for which the future EU reporting mechanism may provide additional impetus for adequate follow-up .
These specific objectives start from the need to avoid any additional burden on the Member State administrations and duplication of efforts with work already covered by GRECO .
With a view to ensuring reciprocity , the Commission may consider modalities of participation of a GRECO representative in the expert group that will be set up to support the work on the EU Anti-Corruption Report .
MODALITIES OF EU PARTICIPATION IN THE WORK OF GRECO The legal framework governing GRECO &apos;s functioning provides for two forms of association with GRECO &apos;s work : observer status and participation , each analysed below .
As regards participation , two alternatives are considered : full membership and membership with limited voting rights .
In addition , the alternative of a joint programme is analysed .
The first assessment below is based on the Commission &apos;s analysis of the legal and practical aspects of potential reinforced cooperation with GRECO .
As a next step , the Commission will request from the Council the authorisation to open negotiations for EU participation in GRECO .
Status of observer Statutory Resolution ( 93 ) 28 of the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers on partial and enlarged agreements provides for the possibility of certain activities to be carried out by the states parties jointly with one or more non-member states , through enlarged or enlarged partial agreements .
GRECO was created by means of an enlarged partial agreement .
Any non-member of the Council of Europe and any international organisation may be invited by the Committee of Ministers to take part as an observer in the activities of an enlarged partial agreement .
The Resolution does not define the specifics of the rights and obligations of observers in partial and enlarged agreements .
Therefore , the general provisions of Statutory Resolution ( 93 ) 26 of the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers on observer status apply .
According to these , observer status gives no right to be represented in the Committee of Ministers or the Parliamentary Assembly , unless a specific decision was taken by one of these organs .
GRECO has granted observer status to the OECD and the UN , represented by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime ( UNODC ) .
This practice has also been followed in other partial agreements of the Council of Europe .
No budgetary contribution is required from the observer .
While the invitation of the EU to GRECO as an observer can follow observership of other international organisations and has no budgetary implications , the limited scope of such an arrangement and its low added value discourage this option .
Observer status can ensure only limited participation in the evaluation of Member States .
It would not allow for EU involvement in the overall preparation of evaluations and hence not facilitate focusing on matters relevant for the EU .
Consequently , it cannot guarantee the needed input for the future EU Anti-Corruption Report .
Also , it would not fully comply with the Stockholm Programme , which calls for the development of a comprehensive anti-corruption policy in close cooperation with GRECO .
Participation Statutory Resolution ( 93 ) 28 of the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers has a broad provision for the ( former ) European Community &apos;s participation in partial and enlarged agreements , stipulating that the modalities of participation are to be determined in the invitation to participate .
GRECO &apos;s Statute reiterates this , mentioning that the modalities of the ( former ) Community &apos;s participation in GRECO are to be determined in the resolution inviting it to participate .
GRECO &apos;s Rules of Procedure provide in Rule 2 that the ( former ) European Community may become a &apos; member &apos; of GRECO through the following means : Upon invitation of the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers to participate in GRECO .
To this end , a proposal should be made by GRECO and endorsed by its Statutory Committee .
The formal invitation takes the form of a Resolution adopted by the Committee of Ministers , followed by an agreement with the EU , via an exchange of letters ; Accession to the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption , upon invitation by the Committee of Ministers ; Accession to the Civil Law Convention on Corruption .
To date , the EU participates in partial agreements such as the Venice Commission and the Cooperation Group for the prevention of , protection against and organisation of relief in major natural and technological disasters .
The EU is also member of the European Pharmacopoeia Convention and of the European Audiovisual Observatory , as well as participant to a large number of Council of Europe partial agreements .
Given that the GRECO Statute refers to EU participation in GRECO and that the GRECO rules of procedure refer to &apos; membership &apos; , participation therefore assumes a form of membership the details of which are established in a specific agreement .
Consequently , this Report analyses two modalities of participation : full membership ( i.e.
full voting rights ) and membership with limited voting rights .
Full membership Full-fledged membership would give the EU voting rights in the GRECO plenary on all matters under GRECO competence ( e.g.
evaluation / compliance reports , procedural matters , financial / budgetary issues ) .
As the EU will not act on behalf of the Member States in the GRECO plenary , it would have one vote , as all other members .
According to Article 8 ( 6 ) of the GRECO Statute , &apos; members of GRECO participating in the mutual evaluation shall have the right to vote &apos; .
Although the EU is not party to the Council of Europe &apos;s Criminal and Civil Law Conventions on Corruption , according to the GRECO regulatory framework , it may still be evaluated .
The evaluation of the EU institutions would concern mainly the Twenty Guiding Principles for the Fight against Corruption and would assume a form of prior endorsement ( possibly a unilateral statement ) of these principles .
Through accession to UNCAC , a precedent has been created for full-fledged membership of the EU in an organisation that also carries out reviews of its members .
However , in the case of UNCAC , the EU is not currently participating in the mutual review process .
Under this option , the EU would participate fully in the evaluation procedure of Member States , as well as candidate countries , potential candidates , and other third countries .
Consequently , the EU would be able to have a representative nominated in GRECO &apos;s Bureau according to the applicable rules ( i.e.
rotating basis ) .
The EU would be member of GRECO &apos;s Statutory Committee , which has decision-making powers on budgetary matters .
All other rights and obligations under GRECO &apos;s Statute and Rules of Procedure would apply to the EU .
The EU would become a contributor to the GRECO budget .
The impact assessment accompanying the Commission Decision on the setting up of an EU reporting mechanism for periodical evaluation estimated the potential financial costs of EU participation in GRECO at about 450,000 Euros per year .
This would cover the contribution to the GRECO budget ( i.e.
around 300,000 euros for a major contributor ) and the cost of activities not currently carried out by GRECO that would mainly benefit the EU ( e.g.
comparative reports and identification of outstanding recommendations for the EU-27 ) .
Such activities may be financed , for example , via service contracts or action grants .
This option has a high potential to meet all the specific objectives mentioned in section 3 .
It would also ensure : high visibility of the EU-GRECO cooperation ; complementarity between GRECO and the future EU reporting mechanism ; potential to ensure further improvements in the GRECO evaluation system ; greater focus on EU policy areas .
However , evaluation of EU institutions by GRECO is an endeavour that needs to be assessed in more depth in terms of requisites , feasibility and potential impact , the GRECO evaluation system being geared to countries rather than organisations .
While some of the Twenty Guiding Principles may be applied to organisations as well ( e.g.
integrity in public administration ) , an evaluation under the current GRECO procedures would not be comprehensive and its added value rather unclear for both GRECO and the Union .
Without the evaluation of EU institutions by GRECO , the EU would not have full voting rights in the GRECO plenary .
Membership with limited voting rights GRECO Statute stipulates that the modalities of the EU &apos;s participation will be determined in the resolution inviting it to participate , without any specific indication as to the type of participation .
Thus , EU participation may also take the form of membership with limited voted rights .
Such an alternative may not require evaluation of the EU by GRECO , but would imply the creation of a framework for a further joint assessment by the two organisations of the requisites , feasibility and potential impact of the evaluation of EU institutions , taking account of the specificities and competences of the EU .
However , in its 50th meeting , the GRECO plenary stressed that , while acknowledging that special arrangements might be necessary to accommodate to the particularities of the EU , the evaluation of EU institutions by GRECO must be more than just a remote possibility ( i.e.
the assessment would need to progressively lead to EU &apos;s evaluation ) .
Under this option , the EU becomes a contributor to the GRECO budget , with a slightly reduced contribution than in the case of full membership .
The EU would have the right to vote on procedural , financial and budgetary issues .
It would have no right to vote in the GRECO plenary on the adoption of evaluation and compliance reports , no representative in the GRECO &apos;s Bureau and would not participate in the elections for president and vice-president .
The EU would appoint representatives to the GRECO plenary , participate in its debates , make recommendations on evaluation / compliance reports , and possibly have a representative participating as an observer in the country visits in the Member States , candidate countries , potential candidates , and other states accepting such participation .
The EU would be able to formulate suggestions as to the organisation of evaluations and their follow-up .
The practical arrangements for EU participation in GRECO would be reviewed by the Commission jointly with GRECO on a periodical basis ( e.g.
every 5 years ) , and potential amendments may be adopted by mutual agreement between GRECO and the EU .
This option would ensure input to the future EU Anti-Corruption Report : i.e.
a comparative analysis carried out by GRECO based on the existing evaluation and compliance reports on Member States and flagging of the most relevant outstanding recommendations .
It would largely meet the specific objectives mentioned in section 3 , allowing EU participation in the evaluation of Member States .
Although it would not have any decision-making power in the evaluation process , the EU may be actively involved in implementation and prompt actions which may ensure additional focus on policy areas more relevant for the EU .
Cooperation between GRECO and the EU would gain political weight , and duplication would be avoided .
The issue of the evaluation of EU institutions by GRECO would need to be clarified as a matter of priority in negotiations .
The advantages of a simplified form of participation are however clearer where the EU would not be required to commit to the evaluation of its institutions .
Joint programme This would assume EU financial assistance to GRECO in the form of a grant for the delivery of specific predefined results and may span a set period of time ( 2-3 years ) , with the possibility of periodical renewal .
Such a solution for targeted cooperation between the EU and GRECO has already been implemented .
For example , the Council of Europe participates in the Eastern Partnership as a privileged partner , supporting with its expertise the EU and the Eastern Partnership countries .
To give some political weight to the partnership , a Memorandum of Understanding or an agreement may be concluded with GRECO , as in the case of the agreement between the Council of Europe and the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights .
As to objectives , a joint programme may ensure input from GRECO to the future EU Anti-Corruption Report , notably through comparative analysis of existing GRECO evaluation / compliance reports on Member States and flagging of outstanding recommendations .
This would also avoid duplication .
The budget involved would be lower than that needed for membership with limited voting rights ( i.e.
roughly around 200-250,000 Euros per year , covering the drafting of comparative reports , logistical costs , workshops , etc . ) .
However , a joint programme , while meeting some of the specific objectives , would not meet the overall objective of creating synergies between GRECO expertise and EU political leverage .
Partnership between the two organisations would be less visible and EU involvement in GRECO &apos;s evaluations would be less active .
This option might be perceived as a purely technical solution , with the EU acting more as a contractor rather than a partner .
It would thus have less added value than participation in GRECO .
CONCLUSION The Council is invited to consider the options identified in this Report .
Taking into account the increased competences of the EU and the need for a comprehensive EU policy against corruption , participation in GRECO ( i.e.
membership ) is , in Commission &apos;s view , the appropriate way forward to meet the objectives set by the Stockholm Programme .
As the future EU reporting mechanism aims to measure anti-corruption efforts in Member States , with a view to identifying EU trends and proposing policy and legal action at EU level , participation in GRECO would facilitate the monitoring task .
Cooperation would be more visible and the risk of overlapping avoided .
In addition , participation as a full-fledged member or a member with limited voting rights would ensure good use of the mutual benefits of GRECO &apos;s expertise in monitoring anti-corruption efforts and the EU &apos;s political leverage over the Member States .
It is thus likely to contribute , jointly with the future EU reporting mechanism , to creating a momentum for more effective enforcement of anti-corruption policies in the EU-27 .
The Commission has held some preliminary discussions with the GRECO Secretariat , with a view to identifying the main matters of interest and potential alternatives in terms of the legal and practical feasibility of EU participation in GRECO .
In terms of practical feasibility , membership with limited voting rights would seem a possible and suitable option to be considered in negotiations .
However , a key issue to be addressed under this option is the evaluation of EU institutions by GRECO , whereby evaluation of EU institutions would commend full membership .
The actual modalities of EU participation in GRECO ( e.g.
form of participation , participation in the Council of Europe bodies , practical arrangements , budgetary contribution ) would have to be carefully negotiated with GRECO .
To this end , the Commission will request the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations for the EU &apos;s participation in GRECO .
Negotiations would be conducted in the light of the general principles of cooperation between the EU and the Council of Europe , namely : specificity and limits of the EU &apos;s competence .
It should however allow the EU to establish higher standards within its borders ; privileged working relationship to ensure a coordinated approach at European level towards corruption .
For the EU , access to the early stages of evaluation rounds and the drafting of country reports , as well as the comparative analysis of Member States &apos; evaluations and the flagging of outstanding recommendations , would be essential .
In turn , EU membership would enhance the visibility of GRECO a nd provide an opportunity for GRECO recommendations to be considered and where relevant followed up within the EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism .
Finally , apart from the agreement with the GRECO plenary , the potential participation of the EU in GRECO requires endorsement by the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers , which is the initiator of the formal participation procedure .
Accordingly , the Communication on EU policy against corruption calls upon Member States to fully support , within the Council of Europe &apos;s Committee of Ministers , the EU &apos;s application for participation in GRECO .
LEGISLATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR PROPOSALS FRAMEWORK OF THE PROPOSAL / INITIATIVE Title of the proposal / initiative Commission Decision establishing an EU anti-corruption reporting mechanism for periodic assessment ( &apos; EU Anti-Corruption Report &apos; ) and Report on modalities of EU participation in Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) Policy area ( s ) concerned in the ABM / ABB structure Home Affairs Security and Safeguarding Liberties Nature of the proposal / initiative The proposal / initiative relates to a new action The proposal / initiative relates to a new action following a pilot project / preparatory action The proposal / initiative relates to the extension of an existing action The proposal / initiative relates to an action redirected towards a new action Objectives The Commission &apos;s multiannual strategic objective ( s ) targeted by the proposal / initiative Stockholm Action Plan – Protection against Serious and Organized Crime Specific objective ( s ) and ABM / ABB activity ( ies ) concerned Specific objective No 2 Enhancing the EU &apos;s capacity to prevent , fight and limit the consequences of criminal acts Specific sub-objectives : EU Anti-Corruption Report 1. drafting , publication and dissemination of the Report .
2. consultation with experts ( i.e.
setting up of an expert group ) .
3. civil society input .
4. setting up and functioning of national research correspondents network .
5. experience-sharing programme 6. comparative analysis and flagging of outstanding recommendations for the EU Member States based on information available with the GRECO Secretariat .
7 .
EU membership of GRECO .
ABM / ABB activity ( ies ) concerned 1805 Security and Safeguarding Liberties Expected result ( s ) and impact Specify the effects which the proposal / initiative should have on the beneficiaries / groups targeted .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will assess periodically the anti-corruption efforts in the EU27 .
It will provide a clear picture of the state of play in the Union , and identify weak spots and EU trends , with the view to prompt additional political will of the Member States to adress corruption and to prepare future EU policy actions .
EU participation in GRECO would ensure that synergies are created between the two mechanisms .
Indicators of results and impact Specify the indicators for monitoring implementation of the proposal / initiative .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will be managed by the Commission and published every two years .
The Commission will be assisted by an expert group , a network of local research correspondents and civil society assessments .
The Commission will constantly supervise the activity of the experts and the input of the research correspondents and civil society .
At each assessment round the follow-up of the recommendations of previous reports will be scrutinised .
Following the adoption of the Report on modalities of EU participation in GRECO , the Commission will ask the Council to authorize the opening of negotiations with the Council of Europe .
In case of EU participation in GRECO , the Commission intends to review the practical arrangements for participation on a regular basis ( e.g.
every 5 years ) , based on the results of the reinforced cooperation .
Grounds for the proposal / initiative Requirement ( s ) to be met in the short or long term The Commission will select at each assessment round a number of cross-cutting elements relevant at EU level at a given moment , as well as aspects specific to each Member State .
These will be assessed against certain indicators , some selected in line with already existing standards , and some newly developed .
The Commission will be assisted by : an expert group set up by a separate Commission Decision ( to be adopted soon after the anti-corruption package ) advising on : indicators , assessment of Member States &apos; performance , identifying best practices and EU trends , recommendations , and potential EU proposals ; a network of local research correspondents , set up by the Commission through procurement procedures and formed of civil society and academia , that will collect relevant information in each Member State ; civil society assessments ( to be contracted through targeted calls for proposals ) .
The civil society organisations will be encouraged to apply for subject specific assessments of Member States &apos; anti-corruption efforts .
The development of an experience sharing programme may be considered to help Member States , local NGOs or other stakeholders to identify best practices and shortcomings , raise awareness or provide training .
The decision to set up such programme and the details of its functioning may only be taken / clarified at a later stage , once the preparations for the first Report are more advanced .
Added value of EU involvement The Stockholm Programme recognises corruption as a trans-national threat that challenges EU internal security .
There is a need for action at EU level , since the problems associated with corruption cannot be adequately solved by Member States alone .
Enhancing fight against corruption is also relevant for policy areas where large amounts of EU resources are involved .
The EU has the required political leverage and is therefore better placed to act as a catalyst for boosting the anti-corruption policy of the EU and Member States .
Lessons learned from similar experiences in the past To date there is no mechanism in place at EU level to measure in a coherent manner the enforcement of anti-corruption policies .
The only EU monitoring tool that also covers anti-corruption issues is the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism for Romania and Bulgaria which has managed over time to maintain or revive a certain momentum for reforms .
Based on annual assessments , indices and qualitative judgments , the work of civil society organisations , like Transparency International , placed corruption squarely on the political agenda in many countries worldwide and generated political pressure for reforms .
At international level , the main existing evaluation mechanisms ( e.g.
GRECO , the OECD Working Group on Bribery and the UN Convention against Corruption ) , in spite of obvious benefits , have also proven their limitations , notably as regards prompting additional political will at national level .
The EU has a unique leverage to generate this political will .
The new EU Anti-Corruption Report will strive to be fact-oriented , focused , outspoken , and flexible .
Coherence and possible synergy with other relevant instruments The EU anti-corruption package is part of the wider Commission &apos;s strategic initiative on the protection of licit economy which also comprises the new Commission Anti-Fraud Strategy and the asset recovery legislative initiative .
The current proposal is fine-tuned with both .
Implementation with a start-up period from the date of the adoption of Commission Decision in the case of the EU Anti-Corruption Report and from the date of EU accession act in case of EU participation in GRECO .
This Legislative Financial Framework covers the first five years of implementation .
followed by full-scale operation .
Management mode ( s ) envisaged Centralised direct management by the Commission Centralised indirect management with the delegation of implementation tasks to : executive agencies ; bodies set up by the Communities ; national public-sector bodies / bodies with public-service mission ; persons entrusted with the implementation of specific actions pursuant to Title V of the Treaty on European Union and identified in the relevant basic act within the meaning of Article 49 of the Financial Regulation .
Shared management with the Member States Decentralised management with third countries Joint management with international organisations ( to be specified ) If more than one management mode is indicated , please provide details in the &quot; Comments &quot; section .
Comments MANAGEMENT MEASURES Monitoring and reporting rules Specify frequency and conditions .
The EU Anti-Corruption Report will be published every two years , starting in 2013 .
The implementation is subject to future monitoring and evaluation .
Potential indicators are : EU &apos;s CPI ranking , national anti-corruption strategies , reported experiences with corruption , instances of new anti-corruption policies / practices , number of peer learning activities sponsored by the Commission , levels of awareness , time taken to transpose and implement legislation , perceptions of transparency .
GRECO &apos;s outstanding recommendations on the Member States will be picked up by the EU reporting mechanism .
Management and control system Risk ( s ) identified : negative reception by the Member States , fear of overlapping with other existing mechanisms and of additional burden on the national administrations ; difficulties in gathering information and / or lack of active involvement of the experts , researchers and civil society organisations .
Control method ( s ) envisaged Regular evaluations of the effectiveness of the new reporting mehanism are considered , with the first evaluation after the publication of two EU Anti-corruption Reports .
The Commission may then issue evaluation reports every 5 years and based on the findings it may consider any further amendment to or other possible developments of the mechanism .
Measures to prevent fraud and irregularities Specify existing or envisaged prevention and protection measures .
The preparatory activities with financial implications ( i.e.
expert group , network of research correspondents , supporting actions for the drafting of the Report , civil society input , potential experience sharing programme , participation in GRECO ) shall be subject to the financial control of the Commission and to the audits of the Court of Auditors .
ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT OF THE PROPOSAL / INITIATIVE Heading ( s ) of the multiannual financial framework and expenditure budget line ( s ) affected Existing expenditure budget lines In order of multiannual financial framework headings and budget lines .
The human resources required will be met by staff from the DG who are already assigned to management of the action and / or have been redeployed within the DG , together if necessary with any additional allocation which may be granted to the managing DG under the annual allocation procedure and in the light of budgetary constraints .
Description of tasks to be carried out : Officials and temporary agents Coordination and organisation of meetings / conferences , processing and assessment of information , secretarial tasks for the expert group and network of research correspondents , drafting of the EU Anti-Corruption Reports , cooperation with GRECO , etc .
External personnel Compatibility with the current multiannual financial framework Proposal / initiative is compatible the current multiannual financial framework .
Proposal / initiative will entail reprogramming of the relevant heading in the multiannual financial framework .
Explain what reprogramming is required , specifying the budget lines concerned and the corresponding amounts .
Proposal / initiative requires application of the flexibility instrument or revision of the multiannual financial framework .
Explain what is required , specifying the headings and budget lines concerned and the corresponding amounts .
Third-party contributions The proposal / initiative does not provide for co-financing by third parties The proposal / initiative provides for the co-financing estimated below : GRECO evaluations have led to important changes in the legal and institutional setting for the financing of political parties in some EU Member States ( Slovenia , Finland , Estonia , Latvia ) .
For example , the 2005 GRECO evaluation report did not alert to the seriousness of the systemic problems that generated a chain of corruption scandals linked with the financial crisis that emerged soon afterwards .
The Bureau is composed of GRECO &apos;s President and Vice-President , and five other representatives of the GRECO members entitled to vote .
The Bureau prepares the draft annual programme of activities and the draft annual activity report , makes proposals on the draft budget , organises country visits , proposes the composition of evaluation teams , prepares the agenda for the GRECO plenary , and proposes the provisions to be selected for evaluation .
The comparative analysis would assume additional work for the GRECO Secretariat .
However , it will be based on the existing evaluation / compliance reports .
It will not bring an additional evaluation step .
It will only assess what has been already produced by GRECO .
Since membership with limited voting rights assumes a more limited participation in the evaluation process , the costs entailed by these activities will be deducted from the EU contribution to the GRECO budget ( i.e.
the contribution would be lower than 300,000 Euros per year ) .
ABM : Activity-Based Management – ABB : Activity-Based Budgeting .
The additional division in sub-objectives is done to facilitate the calculation of the breakdown of estimated impact on expenditure in section 3.2 .
DA = Differentiated appropriations / DNA = Non-Differentiated Appropriations EFTA : European Free Trade Association .
Candidate countries and , where applicable , potential candidate countries from the Western Balkans .
Technical and / or administrative assistance and expenditure in support of the implementation of EU programmes and / or actions ( former &quot; BA &quot; lines ) , indirect research , direct research .
Outputs are products and services to be supplied ( e.g.
: number of student exchanges financed , number of km of roads built , etc . ) .
Through targeted calls for proposals within the EU programme for prevention and fight against crime ( call targeting financial and economic crime ) , civil society organisations will be encouraged to apply for subject specific assessments of Member States &apos; anti-corruption efforts .
The exact number and specific target of each contract cannot be predicted at this point .
Public procurement procedures .
The contractor will be tasked to set up the network of 27 local research correspondents and cover the coordination / logistic aspects .
The decision to set up such programme and the details of its functioning may only be taken / clarified at a later stage , once the preparations for the first Report are more advanced .
One possibility for its setting up would be via procurement procedures ( i.e.
a contractor tasked to organise a number of roughly 5 experience-sharing workshops / events per year ) .
The costs were estimated for approximately 50 participants + 5 speakers , with 1,000 Euros cost / person and an overall 100,000 Euros for organisation / logistics / dissemination / communication for each event .
Technical and / or administrative assistance and expenditure in support of the implementation of EU programmes and / or actions ( former &quot; BA &quot; lines ) , indirect research , direct research .
CA = Contract Agent ; INT = agency staff ( &quot; Intérimaire &quot; ) ; JED = &quot; Jeune Expert en Délégation &quot; ( Young Experts in Delegations ) ; LA = Local Agent ; SNE = Seconded National Expert ; United Nations Convention against Corruption This Decision authorises the President of the Council to designate the persons empowered to sign the United Nations Convention against Corruption on behalf of the European Community .
The Convention aims to boost the effectiveness of the fight against corruption , promote the proper management of public affairs and encourage international cooperation and technical assistance .
ACT Council Decision on the signing , on behalf of the European Community , of the United Nations Convention against Corruption .
SUMMARY At the conference held in Merida ( Mexico ) from 9 to 11 December 2003 , the United Nations Convention against Corruption was opened for signing .
At its 2658th session on 10 May 2005 , the Council adopted the Commission proposal concerning the signing of the Convention .
The Decision authorises the President of the Council to designate the persons empowered to sign the United Nations Convention on behalf of the European Community .
On 15 September 2005 , the European Commission and the Council Presidency signed the Convention on behalf of the European Community .
The Convention , now known as the Merida Convention , was adopted by the UN General Assembly on 31 October 2003 ( Resolution 58 / 4 ) and was open for signing until 9 December 2005 .
Producing an effective instrument against corruption In December 2000 , the UN General Assembly decided to establish a special committee open to all States for drawing up an effective international legal instrument against corruption ( Resolution 55 / 61 ) .
The committee negotiated the Convention between January 2002 and October 2003 .
The Commission represented the European Community ’ s interests .
The Commission considers that the objectives set by the Council in its negotiating directives have been attained .
The Convention provides for a high standard of preventive and technical assistance measures in matters within the Community ’ s powers , in particular with regard to the internal market .
This includes measures to prevent and to combat money laundering , as well as standards on accounting in the private sector and on transparency and equal access of all candidates for public works supply and service contracts .
As the Member States stated that they would sign the Convention as soon as it was opened for signing in Merida , Mexico ( Spain alone of the EU15 not having done so ) , the Commission asserts that the European Community should also do so .
To that end , the Commission proposed that the Presidency of the Council designate the persons empowered to sign the Convention on behalf of the European Community .
The Council adopted the Commission proposal without debate .
Fighting corruption : the UN Convention The purposes of the Convention are to : promote and strengthen measures to prevent and combat corruption more efficiently and effectively ; promote , facilitate and support international cooperation and technical assistance ; promote integrity , accountability and proper management of public affairs and public property .
It applies to the prevention , investigation and prosecution of corruption and to the freezing , seizure , confiscation and return of the proceeds of offences .
The Convention enumerates in detail the measures to prevent corruption , including the application of prevention policies and practices , the establishment of bodies for that purpose , the application of codes of conduct for public officials and objective criteria for the recruitment and promotion of civil servants , and public procurement .
It recommends promoting transparency and accountability in the management of public finances and in the private sector , with tougher accounting and auditing standards .
Measures to prevent money-laundering are also provided for , together with measures to secure the independence of the judiciary .
Public reporting and the participation of society are encouraged as preventive measures .
Regarding criminalisation , detection and repression , the Convention recommends the State Parties to adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish a whole series of criminal offences .
These are : corruption of national or foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations ; embezzlement , misappropriation or other diversion by a public official of any public or private property ; trading in influence ; abuse of functions and illicit enrichment .
In all respects , the Convention regards as corruption the offer or acceptance of undue advantages for oneself or for another person or entity .
In the private sector , it calls for the creation of offences of embezzlement and corruption .
There would also be offences of laundering the proceeds of crime , handling stolen property , obstructing the administration of justice , and participating in and attempting embezzlement or corruption .
The State Parties are recommended to take the necessary measures to : provide for the liability of legal persons ; allow the freezing , seizure and confiscation ; protect witnesses , experts and victims ; protect reporting persons ; tackle the consequences of acts of corruption ; ensure that entities or persons who have suffered damage as a result of an act of corruption have the right to initiate legal proceedings for compensation ; establish a body or bodies or appoint persons specialised in combating corruption through law enforcement ; encourage cooperation with law enforcement authorities ; encourage cooperation between national authorities and with the private sector ; overcome obstacles that may arise out of the application of bank secrecy laws ; take account of the previous convictions of an alleged offender in another State for the purpose of criminal proceedings ; establish their jurisdiction over offences committed on their territory , or against them , or by one of their nationals etc .
State Parties are also to take the necessary measures concerning proceedings and penalties against public officials , so as to strike a balance between their immunities and the offences committed by them , including the ensuing consequences .
The Convention devotes a chapter to international cooperation .
The State Parties are to cooperate on criminal matters and on matters of extradition and transfer of sentenced persons , in a variety of situations described by the Convention .
Mutual judicial assistance is a major item in this chapter and the Convention considers a variety of scenarios to provide for the largest range of possibilities for assistance .
The State Parties can also transfer criminal proceedings when necessary , conduct joint investigations and make use of special investigative techniques such as electronic surveillance .
Enforcement authorities are called on to cooperate with each other through more effective channels of communication and cooperation when conducting investigations .
Chapter V concerns asset recovery .
The return of assets pursuant to this chapter is a fundamental principle of the Convention .
Financial institutions are encouraged to verify the identity of customers and beneficial owners of high-value accounts and to avoid banks that have no physical presence and are not affiliated with a regulated financial group .
The chapter further specifies measures to be taken for the direct recovery of assets and the machinery for doing this by means of international cooperation on confiscation .
Such assets should be returned in accordance with the rules laid down by the Convention .
A financial intelligence unit and bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements to enhance the effectiveness of international cooperation are also called for .
State Parties are required to develop specific training programmes and provide one another the widest measure of technical assistance .
The collection , exchange and analysis of information on corruption is provided for , as are practical measures to enhance cooperation at various levels , as well as financial and material assistance to support the efforts of developing countries and countries with economies in transition to prevent and fight corruption effectively .
A conference of the State Parties is established to improve their capacity and cooperation , in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the Convention and to promote and review its implementation .
The Convention is open for signature by regional economic integration organisations , provided that at least one Member State of such an organisation has signed it .
It is to enter into force on the 90th day after the date of deposit of the 30th instrument of ratification , acceptance , approval or accession .
RELATED ACTS Council Decision 2008 / 201 / EC of 25 September 2008 on the conclusion , on behalf of the European Community , of the United Nations Convention against Corruption &#91; Official Journal L 287 of 29.10.2008 &#93; .
With this Decision , the United Nations Convention against Corruption was approved on behalf of the European Community .
The Decision authorises the President of the Council to designate the person ( s ) who shall be empowered to deposit the Community ’ s instrument of formal confirmation .
This instrument is binding on the Community .
It consists of a declaration of the Community ’ s competence regarding matters that are governed by the Convention ( Annex II ) and of a statement concerning dispute settlement on the interpretation or application of the Convention ( Annex III ) .
