Equestrianism Equestrianism ( from Latin equester , equestr- , equus , horseman , horse ) , more often known as riding , horse riding ( British English ) or horseback riding ( American English ) , refers to the skill of riding , driving , steeplechasing or vaulting with horses .
This broad description includes the use of horses for practical working purposes , transportation , recreational activities , artistic or cultural exercises and competitive sport .
Overview of equestrian activities Horses are trained and ridden for practical working purposes such as in police work or for controlling herd animals on a ranch .
They are also used in competitive sports including , but not limited to , dressage , endurance riding , eventing , reining , show jumping , tent pegging , vaulting , polo , horse racing , driving and rodeo .
( See additional equestrian sports listed later in this article for more examples . )
Some popular forms of competition are grouped together at horse shows , where horses perform in a wide variety of disciplines .
Horses ( and other equids such as mules and donkeys ) are used for non-competitive recreational riding such as fox hunting , trail riding or hacking .
There is public access to horse trails in almost every part of the world ; many parks , ranches and public stables offer both guided and independent riding .
Horses are also used for therapeutic purposes , both in specialized paraequestrian competition as well as non-competitive riding to improve human health and emotional development .
Horses are also driven in harness racing , at horse shows and in other types of exhibition , historical reenactment or ceremony , often pulling carriages .
In some parts of the world , they are still used for practical purposes such as farming .
Horses continue to be used in public service : in traditional ceremonies ( parades , funerals ) , police and volunteer mounted patrols and for mounted search and rescue .
Riding halls enable the training of horse and rider in all weathers as well as indoor competition riding .
History of horse use Though there is controversy over the exact date horses were domesticated and when they were first ridden , the best estimate is that horses first were ridden approximately 3500 BC .
Indirect evidence suggests that horses were ridden long before they were driven .
There is some evidence that about 3,000 BC , near the Dnieper River and the Don River , people were using bits on horses , as a stallion that was buried there shows teeth wear consistent with using a bit .
However , the most unequivocal early archaeological evidence of equines put to working use was of horses being driven .
Chariot burials about 2500 BC present the most direct hard evidence of horses used as working animals .
In ancient times chariot warfare was followed by the use of war horses as light and heavy cavalry .
The horse played an important role throughout human history all over the world , both in warfare and in peaceful pursuits such as transportation , trade and agriculture .
Horses lived in North America , but died out at the end of the Ice Age .
Horses were brought back to North America by European explorers , beginning with the second voyage of Columbus in 1493 .
Horse racing Humans appear to have long expressed a desire to know which horse ( or horses ) were the fastest , and horse racing has ancient roots .
Gambling on horse races appears to go hand-in hand with racing and has a long history as well .
Thoroughbreds have the pre-eminent reputation as a racing breed , but other breeds also race .
Types of horse racing Under saddle : Thoroughbred horse racing is the most popular form worldwide .
In the UK , it is known as flat racing and is governed by the Jockey Club in the United Kingdom .
In the USA , horse racing is governed by The Jockey Club .
Steeplechasing involves racing on a track where the horses also jump over obstacles .
It is most common in the UK , where it is also called National Hunt racing .
American Quarter Horse racing — races over distances of approximately a quarter-mile .
Seen mostly in the United States , sanctioned by the American Quarter Horse Association .
Arabian horses , Akhal-Teke , Appaloosas , American Paint Horses and other light breeds are also raced worldwide .
Endurance riding , a sport in which the Arabian horse dominates at the top levels , has become very popular in the United States and in Europe .
The Federation Equestre International ( FEI ) governs international races , and the American Endurance Ride Conference ( AERC ) organizes the sport in North America .
Endurance races take place over a given , measured distance and the horses have an even start .
Races are usually 50 to 100 miles ( 80 to 161 km ) , over mountainous or other natural terrain , with scheduled stops to take the horses &apos; vital signs , check soundness and verify that the horse is fit to continue .
The first horse to finish and be confirmed by the veterinarian as fit to continue is the winner .
Additional awards are usually given to the best-conditioned horses who finish in the top 10 .
Limited distance rides of about 25 – 20 miles ( 40 – 32 km ) are offered to newcomers .
Ride and Tie ( in North America , organized by Ride and Tie Association ) .
Ride and Tie involves three equal partners : two humans and one horse .
The humans alternately run and ride .
Show jumping : Show jumping is when a horse carries a rider over an obstacle also commonly known as a jump .
There are usually multiple jumps in a show and if the horse hits the jump then they will get points deducted in a show .
In harness : Both light and heavy breeds as well as ponies are raced in harness with a sulky or racing bike .
The Standardbred dominates the sport in both trotting and pacing varieties .
The United States Trotting Association organizes harness racing in the United States .
Harness racing is also found throughout Europe , New Zealand and Australia .
International and Olympic disciplines Main articles : Equestrian at the Olympics and International Federation for Equestrian Sports Equestrian events were first included in the modern Olympic Games in 1900 .
By 1912 , all three Olympic disciplines still seen today were part of the games .
The following forms of competition are recognized worldwide and are a part of the equestrian events at the Olympics .
They are governed by the rules of the International Federation for Equestrian Sports ( FEI ) .
Dressage ( &quot; training &quot; in French ) involves the progressive training of the horse to a high level of impulsion , collection and obedience .
Competitive dressage has the goal of showing the horse carrying out , on request , the natural movements that it performs without thinking while running loose .
Show jumping comprises a timed event judged on the ability of the horse and rider to jump over a series of obstacles , in a given order and with the fewest refusals or knockdowns of portions of the obstacles .
Eventing , also called combined training , horse trials , the three-day event , the Military or the complete test , puts together the obedience of dressage with the athletic ability of show jumping , the fitness demands the cross-country jumping phase .
In the last-named , the horses jump over fixed obstacles , such as logs , stone walls , banks , ditches and water , trying to finish the course under the &quot; optimum time . &quot;
There was also the &apos; Steeple Chase &apos; Phase , which is now excluded from most major competitions to bring them in line with the Olympic standard .
The additional internationally sanctioned but non-Olympic disciplines governed by the FEI are : combined driving ; endurance ; reining ; and vaulting .
These disciplines are part of the FEI World Equestrian Games every four years and may hold their own individual World Championships in other years .
The FEI also recognizes horseball and tent pegging as its two regional disciplines .
Para-equestrian disciplines Para-equestrian competition at the international level , including the Paralympics , are also governed by the FEI and offer the following competition events : Para-Equestrian Dressage is conducted under the same rules as conventional Dressage , but with riders divided into different competition grades based on their functional abilities .
Para-Equestrian Driving places competitors in various grades based on their skill .
Haute École Main article : Classical dressage The haute école ( F. &quot; high school &quot; ) , an advanced component of Classical dressage , is a highly refined set of skills seldom used in competition but often seen in demonstration performances .
Leading haute ecole demonstration teams include : The Cadre Noir in Saumur , France .
The Spanish Riding School in Vienna , Austria .
The Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre in Queluz , Portugal .
Royal Andalusian School of Equestrian Art in Jerez de la Frontera , Spain .
South African Lipizzaners of Midrand in South Africa .
Horse shows Main article : Horse show Horse shows are held throughout the world with a tremendous variety of possible events , equipment , attire and judging standards used .
However , most forms of horse show competition can be broken into the following broad categories : Equitation , sometimes called seat and hands or horsemanship , refers to events where the rider is judged on form , style and ability .
Pleasure , flat or under saddle classes feature horses who are ridden on the flat ( not jumped ) and judged on manners , performance , movement , style and quality .
Halter , in-hand breeding or conformation classes , where the horse is led by a handler on the ground and judged on conformation and suitability as a breeding animal .
Harness classes , where the horse is driven rather than ridden , but still judged on manners , performance and quality .
Jumping or Over Fences refers broadly to both show jumping and show hunter , where horses and riders must jump obstacles .
&quot; English &quot; riding Main article : English riding See also : Hunt seat , Equitation , Show jumping , Dressage , Riding Horse , Saddle seat , Jumpers , and Hunters In addition to the classical Olympic events , the following forms of competition are seen .
In North America they are referred to as &quot; English riding &quot; in contrast with western riding ; elsewhere in the world , if a distinction is necessary , they are usually described as &quot; classic riding &quot; : Hunt seat or Hunter classes judge the movement and the form of horses suitable for work over fences .
A typical show hunter division would include classes over fences as well as &quot; Hunter under Saddle &quot; or &quot; flat &quot; classes ( sometimes called &quot; hack &quot; classes ) , in which the horse is judged on its performance , manners and movement without having to jump .
Hunters have a long , flat-kneed trot , sometimes called &quot; daisy cutter &quot; movement , a phrase suggesting a good hunter could slice daisies in a field when it reaches its stride out .
The over fences classes in show hunter competition are judged on the form of the horse , its manners and the smoothness of the course .
A horse with good jumping form snaps its knees up and jumps with a good bascule .
It should also be able to canter or gallop with control while having a stride long enough to make a proper number of strides over a given distance between fences .
Hunter classes differ from jumper classes , in which they are not timed , and equitation classes , in which the rider &apos;s performance is the focus .
Hunter style is based on fox hunting , so jumps in the hunter division are usually more natural colors than the jumps in a jumper division .
Arena sports Arena polo and Cowboy polo Pato ( Argentina &apos;s national sport ) Charreada , the highest form of Mexican horsemanship based on a mixture of Spanish and Native traditions .
Equestrian vaulting : In vaulting , a surcingle with two hoops at the top is attached around a horse &apos;s barrel .
The horse also wears a bridle with side reins .
The vaulter is longed on the horse , and performs gymnastic movements while the horse walks , trots , and canters .
Gymkhana , also known as O-Mok-See in the western United States .
Reining Horse sports that use cattle Bullfighting ( rejoneo ) Campdrafting , a type of cattle-working competition popular in Australia Cutting Team penning Working cow horse Defined area sports Buzkashi , a sport originating on the steppes of central Asia , now the national sport of Afghanistan and Kyrgyzstan .
Horseball Jousting and Skill at Arms , events involving use of lances , swords and completion of obstacles .
There are stand-alone competitions and also are often seen at historical reenactments , Renaissance Fairs and Society for Creative Anachronism events .
Mounted Games , a sport where games are played in a relay-style with two to five members per team at very high speed Polo , a team game played on horses , involves riders using a long-handled mallet to drive a ball on the ground into the opposing team &apos;s goal while the opposing team defends their goal Polocrosse Tent pegging Mounted archery Cross-country sports Competitive Mounted Orienteering , a form of orienteering on horses ( but unrelated to orienteering ) – consists of three stages : following a precise route marked on a map , negotiation of obstacles and control of paces .
Le Trec , which comprises three phases – trail riding , with jumping and correct basic flatwork .
Le Trec , which is very popular in Europe , tests the partnership &apos;s ability to cope with an all-day ride across varied terrain , route finding , negotiating natural obstacles and hazards , while considering the welfare of the horse , respecting the countryside and enjoying all it has to offer .
Competitive trail riding , a pace race held across terrain similar to endurance riding , but shorter in length ( 25 – 35 miles ( 56 km ) , depending on class ) .
Being a form of pace race , the objective is not to finish in the least time .
Instead , as in other forms of judged trail riding , each competitor is graded on everything including physical condition , campsite and horse management .
Horsemanship also is considered , including how the rider handles the trail and how horse is handled and presented to the judge and vet throughout the ride .
The horse is graded on performance , manners , etc .
&quot; Pulse and respiration &quot; stops check the horse &apos;s recovery ability .
The judges also set up obstacles along the trail and the horse and rider are graded on how well they perform as a team .
The whole point is the partnership between the horse and rider .
Cross Country Jumping , a jumping course that contains logs and natural obstacles mostly .
The common clothes worn are usually brighter colors and less conservative .
Endurance riding , a competition usually of 50 to 100 miles ( 160 km ) or more , over mountainous or other natural terrain , with scheduled stops to take the horses &apos; vital signs , check soundness and verify that the horse is fit to continue .
The first horse to finish and be confirmed by the veterinarian as fit to continue is the winner .
Additional awards are usually given to the best-conditioned horses who finish in the top 10 .
Fox hunting Hacking , or pleasure riding .
Hunter Pacing is a sport where a horse and rider team travel a trail at speeds based the ideal conditions for the horse , with competitors seeking to ride closest to that perfect time .
Hunter paces are usually held in a series .
Hunter paces are usually a few miles long and covered mostly at a canter or gallop .
The horsemanship and management skills of the rider are also considered in the scoring , and periodic stops are required for veterinarians to check the vital signs and overall soundness of the horses .
Ride and Tie is a form of endurance riding in which teams of 3 ( two humans and one horse ) alternate running and riding .
Steeplechase , a distance horse race with diverse fence and ditch obstacles .
Trail Riding , pleasure riding any breed horse , any style across the land .
Health issues This section needs expansion .
You can help by adding to it .
( January 2009 ) Handling , riding and driving horses has a number of health risks .
Riding has some inherent risks , as when mounted , the rider &apos;s head may be up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) from the ground , and the horse may travel at a speed of up to 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) .
The injuries observed range from very minor injuries to fatalities .
A study in Germany reported that the relative risk of injury from riding a horse , compared to riding a bicycle , was 9 times higher for adolescents and 5.6 times higher for younger children , but that riding a horse was less risky than riding a moped .
In the United States each year an estimated 30 million people ride horses , resulting in 50,000 emergency room visits ( 1 visit per 600 riders per year ) .
Among survey respondents , novice equestrians had an incidence of any injury that was threefold over intermediates , fivefold over advanced equestrians , and nearly eightfold over professionals .
Approximately 100 hours of experience are required to achieve a substantial decline in the risk of injury .
The survey authors conclude that efforts to prevent equestrian injury should focus on novice equestrians .
Mechanisms of injury The most common injury is falling from the horse , followed by being kicked , trampled and bitten .
About 3 out of 4 injuries are due to falling , broadly defined .
Types and severity of injury In Canada , a 10-year study of trauma center patients injured while riding reported that although 48 % had suffered head injuries , only 9 % of these riders had been wearing helmets at the time of their accident .
Other injuries involved the chest ( 54 % ) , abdomen ( 22 % ) and extremities ( 17 % ) .
include : Arm fracture or dislocation ( 31 % ) Head injury ( 21 % ) Leg fracture or dislocation ( 15 % ) Chest injury ( 33 % ) Among 36 members and employees of the Hong Kong Jockey Club who were seen in a trauma center during a period of 5 years , 24 fell from horses and 11 were kicked by the horse .
Injuries comprised : 18 torso ; 11 head , face or neck ; and 11 limb .
The authors of this study recommend that helmets , face shields and body protectors be worn when riding or handling horses .
In New South Wales , Australia , a study of equestrians seen at one hospital over a 6-year period found that 81 % were wearing a helmet at the time of injury , and that helmet use both increased over time and was correlated with a lower rate of admission .
In the United States , an analysis of National Electronic Injury Surveillance System ( NEISS ) data performed by the Equestrian Medical Safety Association studied 78,279 horse-related injuries in 2007 : &quot; The most common injuries included fractures ( 28.5 % ) ; contusions / abrasions ( 28.3 % ) ; strain / sprain ( 14.5 % ) ; internal injury ( 8.1 % ) ; lacerations ( 5.7 % ) ; concussions ( 4.6 % ) ; dislocations ( 1.9 % ) ; and hematomas ( 1.2 % ) .
Most frequent injury sites are the lower trunk ( 19.6 % ) ; head ( 15.0 % ) ; upper trunk ( 13.4 % ) ; shoulder ( 8.2 % ) ; and wrist ( 6.8 % ) .
Within this study patients were treated and released ( 86.2 % ) , were hospitalized ( 8.7 % ) , were transferred ( 3.6 % ) , left without being treated ( 0.8 % ) , remained for observation ( 0.6 % ) and arrived at the hospital deceased ( 0.1 % ) . &quot;
Head injuries Horseback riding is one of the most dangerous sports , especially in relation to head injury .
Statistics from the United States , for example , indicate that about 30 million people ride horses annually .
Head injuries are especially traumatic in horseback riding .
About two-thirds of all riders requiring hospitalization after a fall have sustained a traumatic brain injury .
The use of riding helmets substantially decreases the likelihood and severity of head injuries .
When a rider falls with a helmet , he or she is five times less likely to experience a traumatic brain injury than a rider who falls without a helmet .
Once a helmet has sustained an impact from falling , that part of the helmet is structurally weakened , even if no visible damage is present .
Rules on helmet use in competition Many organizations mandate helmet use in competition or on show grounds , and rules have continually moved in the direction of requiring helmet use .
In 2011 , the United States Equestrian Federation passed a rule making helmet use mandatory while mounted on competition grounds at U.S. nationally rated eventing competitions .
If a rider competing at Prix St. Georges and above is also riding a test at Fourth Level or below , he or she must also wear a helmet at all times while mounted .
Riding astride The idea that riding a horse astride could injure a woman &apos;s sex organs is a historic , but sometimes popular even today , misunderstanding or misconception , particularly that riding astride can damage the hymen .
the relevance of these findings to horse riding is unknown .
In men , sports-related injuries are among the major causes of testicular trauma .
In a small controlled but unblinded study of 52 men , varicocele was significantly more common in equestrians than in non-equestrians .
Criticism of horses in sport See also : Horse racing and Rodeo Organized welfare groups , such as the Humane Society of the United States , and animal rights groups such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals , have been known to criticise some horse sports with claims of animal cruelty .
Horse racing is a popular equestrian sport which is practiced in many nations around the world .
It is inextricably associated with gambling , where in certain events , stakes can become very high .
Despite its illegality in most competitions , these conditions of extreme competitiveness can lead to the use of performing-enhancing drugs and extreme training techniques , which can result in negative side effects for the horses &apos; well-being .
The races themselves have also proved dangerous to the horses – especially steeplechasing , which requires the horse to jump hurdles whilst galloping at full speed .
This can result in injury or death to the horse , as well as the jockey .
Animal rights groups are also primarily concerned that certain sports or training exercises may cause unnecessary pain or injuries to horse athletes .
Some specific training or showing practices are so widely condemned that they have been made illegal at the national level and violations can incur criminal penalties .
The most well-known is soring , a practice of applying a caustic ointment just above the hooves of a Tennessee Walking Horse to make it pick up its feet higher .
However , in spite of a federal law in the United States prohibiting this practice and routine inspections of horse shows by inspectors from the United States Department of Agriculture , soring is still widespread and difficult to eliminate .
Secondary effects of racing have also recently been uncovered .
A 2006 investigation by The Observer in the UK found that each year 6,000 – 10,000 horses are slaughtered for consumption abroad , a significant proportion of which are horses bred for racing .
Horse riding on coinage Horse riding events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors &apos; coins .
One of the recent samples is the € 10 Greek Horse Riding commemorative coin , minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics .
On the composition of the obverse of this coin , the modern horseman is pictured as he jumps over an obstacle , while in the background the ancient horseman is inspired by a representation on a black-figure vase of the 5th century BC .
For the 2012 Olympics , the Royal Mint has produced a 50p coin showing a horse jumping a fence .
A mounted rider from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is featured on a 1973 Canadian quarter dollar coin.Eventing , show jumping and dressage , described under &quot; Olympic disciplines , &quot; above are all &quot; English &quot; riding disciplines that in North America sometimes are loosely classified within the &quot; hunt seat &quot; category .
Saddle seat , is a primarily American discipline , though has recently become somewhat popular in South Africa , was created to show to best advantage the animated movement of high-stepping and gaited breeds such as the American Saddlebred and the Tennessee Walker .
Some Arabians and Morgans are also shown saddle seat in the United States .
There are usually three basic divisions .
Park divisions are for the horses with the highest action .
Pleasure divisions still emphasis animated action , but to a lesser degree , with manners ranking over animation .
Plantation or Country divisions have the least amount of animation ( in some breeds , the horses are flat-shod ) and the greatest emphasis on manners .
Show hack is a competition seen primarily in the United Kingdom , Australia and other nations influenced by British traditions , featuring horses of elegant appearance , with excellent way of going and self-carriage .
A related event is Riding Horse .
&quot; Western &quot; riding Main article : Western riding See also : Reining , Western pleasure , Rodeo , and Cutting ( sport ) Western riding evolved from the cattle-working and warfare traditions brought to the Americas by the Spanish Conquistadors , and both equipment and riding style evolved to meet the working needs of the cowboy on ranches in the American West .
Though the differences between English and Western riding appear dramatic , there are many similarities .
Both styles require riders to have a solid seat , with the hips and shoulders balanced over the feet , with hands independent of the seat so as to avoid disturbing the balance of the horse and interfering with its performance .
The most noticeable feature of western style riding is in the saddle , which has a substantial tree that provides greater support to horse and rider when working long hours in the saddle .
The western saddle features a prominent pommel topped by a horn ( a knob used for dallying a lariat after roping an animal ) , a deep seat and a high cantle .
The stirrups are wider and the saddle has rings and ties that allow objects to be attached to the saddle .
Western horses are asked to perform with a loose rein , controlled by one hand .
The standard western bridle lacks a noseband and usually consists of a single set of reins attached to a curb bit that has somewhat longer and looser shanks than the curb of an English Weymouth bridle or a pelham bit .
Two styles of Western reins developed : The long split reins of the Texas tradition , which are completely separated , or the closed-end &quot; Romal &quot; reins of the California tradition , which have a long single attachment on the ends that can be used as a quirt .
Modern rodeo competitors in timed events sometimes use a closed rein without a romal .
Western riders wear a long-sleeved shirt , denim jeans , boots , and a wide-brimmed cowboy hat .
Cowboy boots , which have pointed toes and higher heels than a traditional riding boot , are designed to prevent the rider &apos;s foot from slipping through the stirrup during a fall , preventing the rider from being dragged — most western saddles have no safety bars for the leathers or automatic stirrup release mechanism .
A rider may wear protective leather leggings called chaps .
Clean , well-fitting work clothing is the usual outfit seen in rodeo , cutting and reining competitions , especially for men , though sometimes both men and women wear brighter colors or finer fabrics for competition than for work .
Show events such as Western pleasure use much flashier equipment , unlike the English traditions where clothing and tack is quiet and unobtrusive .
Saddles , bits and bridles are ornamented with substantial amounts of silver .
The rider may add a jacket or vest , and women &apos;s clothing in particular features vivid colors and even , depending on current fads , rhinestones or sequins .
Western horses are asked to have a brisk , ground-covering walk , but a slow , relaxed jog trot that allows the rider to sit the saddle and not post .
The Western version of the canter is called a lope and while collected and balanced , is expected to be slow and relaxed .
Working western horses seldom use a sustained hand gallop , but must be able to accelerate quickly to high speed when chasing cattle or competing in rodeo speed events , must be able to stop quickly from a dead run and &quot; turn on a dime . &quot;
Harness Horses , mules and donkeys are driven in harness in many different ways .
For working purposes , they can pull a plow or other farm equipment designed to be pulled by animals .
In many parts of the world they still pull wagons for basic hauling and transportation .
They may draw carriages at ceremonies , in parades or for tourist rides .
As noted in &quot; horse racing &quot; above , horses can race in harness , pulling a very lightweight cart known as a sulky .
At the other end of the spectrum , some draft horses compete in horse pulling competitions , where single or teams of horses and their drivers vie to determine who can pull the most weight for a short distance .
In horse show competition , the following general categories of competition are seen : Combined driving , an internationally recognized competition where horses perform an arena-based &quot; dressage &quot; class where precision and control are emphasized , a cross-country &quot; marathon &quot; section that emphasizes fitness and endurance , and a &quot; stadium &quot; or &quot; cones &quot; obstacle course .
Draft horse showing : Most draft horse performance competition is done in harness .
Pleasure driving : Horses and ponies are usually hitched to a light cart shown at a walk and two speeds of trot , with an emphasis on manners .
Fine harness : Also called &quot; Formal driving , &quot; Horses are hitched to a light four-wheeled cart and shown in a manner that emphasizes flashy action and dramatic performance .
Roadster : A horse show competition where exhibitors wear racing silks and ride in a sulky in a style akin to harness racing , only without actually racing , but rather focusing on manners and performance .
Carriage driving , using somewhat larger two or four wheeled carriages , often restored antiques , judged on the turnout / neatness or suitability of horse and carriage .
Rodeo Main article : Rodeo Rodeo events include the following forms of competition : Timed events Barrel racing and pole bending – the timed speed and agility events seen in rodeo as well as gymkhana or O-Mok-See competition .
Both men and women compete in speed events at gymkhanas or O-Mok-Sees ; however , at most professional , sanctioned rodeos , barrel racing is an exclusively women &apos;s sport .
In a barrel race , horse and rider gallop around a cloverleaf pattern of barrels , making agile turns without knocking the barrels over .
In pole bending , horse and rider run the length of a line of six upright poles , turn sharply and weave through the poles , turn again and weave back , then return to the start .
Steer wrestling – Also known as &quot; Bulldogging , &quot; this is a rodeo event where the rider jumps off his horse onto a steer and &apos; wrestles &apos; it to the ground by grabbing it by the horns .
This is probably the single most physically dangerous event in rodeo for the cowboy , who runs a high risk of jumping off a running horse head first and missing the steer or of having the thrown steer land on top of him , sometimes horns first .
Goat tying – usually an event for women or pre-teen girls and boys , a goat is staked out while a mounted rider runs to the goat , dismounts , grabs the goat , throws it to the ground and ties it in the same manner as a calf .
This event was designed to teach smaller or younger riders the basics of calf roping without the more complex need to also lasso the animal .
Roping Roping includes a number of timed events that are based on the real-life tasks of a working cowboy , who often had to capture calves and adult cattle for branding , medical treatment and other purposes .
A lasso or lariat is thrown over the head of a calf or the horns of adult cattle , and the animal is secured in a fashion dictated by its size and age .
Calf roping , also called &quot; tie-down roping , &quot; is an event where a calf is roped around the neck by a lariat , the horse stops and sets back on the rope while the cowboy dismounts , runs to the calf , throws it to the ground and ties three feet together .
( If the horse throws the calf , the cowboy must lose time waiting for the calf to get back to its feet so that the cowboy can do the work .
The job of the horse is to hold the calf steady on the rope ) This activity is still practiced on modern working ranches for branding , medical treatment , and so on .
Team roping , also called &quot; heading and heeling , &quot; is the only rodeo event where men and women riders may compete together .
Two people capture and restrain a full-grown steer .
One horse and rider , the &quot; header , &quot; lassos a running steer &apos;s horns , while the other horse and rider , the &quot; heeler , &quot; lassos the steer &apos;s two hind legs .
Once the animal is captured , the riders face each other and lightly pull the steer between them , so that it loses its balance , thus in the real world allowing restraint for treatment .
Breakaway roping – an easier form of calf roping where a very short lariat is used , tied lightly to the saddle horn with string and a flag .
When the calf is roped , the horse stops , allowing the calf to run on , flagging the end of time when the string and flag breaks from the saddle .
In the United States , this event is primarily for women of all ages and boys under 12 , while in some nations where traditional calf roping is frowned upon , riders of both genders compete .
&quot; Rough Stock &quot; competition In spite of popular myth , most modern &quot; broncs &quot; are not in fact wild horses , but are more commonly spoiled riding horses or horses bred specifically as bucking stock .
Bronc riding – there are two divisions in rodeo , bareback bronc riding , where the rider rides a bucking horse holding onto a leather surcingle or rigging with only one hand , and saddle bronc riding , where the rider rides a modified western saddle without a horn ( for safety ) while holding onto a braided lead rope attached to the horse &apos;s halter .
Bull Riding – though technically not an equestrian event , as the cowboys ride full-grown bulls instead of horses , skills similar to bareback bronc riding are required .
International rodeo Australian rodeo Chilean rodeo Other equestrian activities There are many other forms of equestrian activity and sports seen worldwide .
There are both competitive events and pleasure riding disciplines available .
Straightness ( Geraderichtung ) A horse is straight when the hind legs follow the path of the front legs , on both straight lines and on bending lines , and the body follows the line of travel .
Straightness allows the horse to channel its impulsion directly toward its center of balance , and allows the rider ’ s hand aids to have a connection to the hind end .
When working on straightness in the horse , a common exercise is used called &apos; shoulder in &apos; .
The exercise is the beginning of straightness in the horse as well as collection and can increase impulsion in the horse .
Collection ( Versammlung ) At the apex of the training scale stands collection .
It may refer to collected gaits : they can be used occasionally to supplement less vigorous work .
It involves difficult movements ( such as flying changes ) in more advanced horses .
Collection requires greater muscular strength , so must be advanced upon slowly .
When in a collected gait , the stride length should shorten , and the stride should increase in energy and activity .
When a horse collects , more weight moves to the hindquarters .
Collection is natural for horses and is often seen during pasture play .
A collected horse can move more freely .
The joints of the hind limbs have greater flexion , allowing the horse to lower the hindquarters , bringing the hind legs further under the body , and lighten and lift the forehand .
In essence , collection is the horse &apos;s ability to move its centre of gravity to the rear .
&quot; Airs &quot; above the ground The &quot; school jumps , &quot; or &quot; airs above the ground , &quot; are a series of higher-level classical dressage movements where the horse leaves the ground .
These include the capriole , courbette , the mezair , the croupade , and levade .
None are used in modern competitive dressage , but are performed by horses of various riding academies , including the Spanish Riding School in Vienna , Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre in Lisbon , Portugal , and the Cadre Noir in Saumur .
Baroque horse breeds such as the Andalusian , Lusitano and Lipizzan are most often trained to perform the &quot; airs &quot; today , in part due to their powerfully conformed hindquarters , which allow them the strength to perform these difficult movements .
There is a popular belief that these moves were originally taught to horses for military purposes , and indeed both the Spanish Riding School and the Cadre Noir are military foundations .
However , while agility was necessary on the battlefield , most of the airs as performed today would have actually exposed horses &apos; vulnerable underbellies to the weapons of foot soldiers .
It is therefore more likely that the airs were exercises to develop the agility , responsiveness and physiology of the military horse and rider , rather than to be employed in combat .
Dressage masters The earliest practitioner who wrote treatises that survive today that describe sympathetic and systematic training of the horse was the Greek general Xenophon ( 427 – 355 BC ) .
Despite living over 2000 years ago , his ideas are still widely praised .
Beginning in the Renaissance a number of early modern trainers began to write on the topic of horse training , each expanding upon the work of their predecessors , including Federico Grisone ( mid-16th century ) , Antoine de Pluvinel ( 1555 – 1620 ) , William Cavendish , 1st Duke of Newcastle ( 1592 – 1676 ) , François Robichon de La Guérinière ( 1688 – 1751 ) , François Baucher ( 1796 – 1873 ) , and Gustav Steinbrecht ( 1808 – 1885 ) .
The 20th century saw an increase in writing and teaching about Dressage training and techniques as the discipline became an international sport with the influence of Olympic Equestrian competition .
Tack The rules on permitted cavessons ( nosebands ) saddles , saddle pads , etc . , are subject to change and do change as more and more styles and stylish equipments are introduced into the marketplace .
Dressage horses are shown in minimal tack .
They are not permitted to wear boots ( including hoof or bell boots ) or wraps ( including tail bandages ) during the test , nor are they allowed to wear martingales or training devices such as draw or running reins or the gogue anywhere on the showgrounds during the competition .
Due to the formality of dressage , tack is usually black leather , although dark brown is seen from time to time .
An English-style saddle is required for riding dressage , specifically a &quot; dressage saddle &quot; which is modeled exclusively for the discipline .
It is designed with a long and straight saddle flap , mirroring the leg of the dressage rider , which is long with a slight bend in the knee , a deep seat and usually a pronounced knee block .
Dressage saddles have longer billets and use shorter girth than other types of English saddles to minimize the straps and buckles underneath the rider &apos;s legs .
The saddle is usually placed over a square , white saddle pad .
Colored trim on the white saddle pad is permitted .
A dressage saddle is required in FEI classes , although any simple English-type saddle may be used at the lower levels .
At the lower levels of dressage , a bridle includes a plain cavesson , drop noseband , or flash noseband .
Currently , drop nosebands are relatively uncommon , with the flash more common .
At the upper levels a plain cavesson is used on a double bridle .
Figure-eight ( also called Grackle ) nosebands are not allowed in pure dressage , however they are allowed in the dressage phase of eventing .
Riders are not allowed to use Kineton nosebands , due to their severity .
Beads and colored trim are permitted along the brow band of the bridle .
The dressage horse at lower levels is only permitted to be shown at recognized competitions in a snaffle bit , though the detail regarding bitting varies slightly from organization to organization .
The loose-ring snaffle with a single- or double-joint is most commonly seen .
Harsher snaffle bits , such as twisted wire , corkscrews , slow-twists , and waterfords are not permitted , nor are pelhams , kimberwickes , or gag bits .
Upper level and FEI dressage horses are shown in a double bridle , using both a bradoon and a curb bit with a smooth curb chain .
Turnout of the horse Dressage horses are turned out to a high standard .
It is usual for horses to have their manes braided ( also known as plaited ) .
In eventing , the mane is preferred to be braided on the right ; in competitive dressage , however , it is occasionally braided on the left , should it naturally fall there .
Braids vary in size , but Europeans tend to put in fewer , larger braids , while Americans tend to have more smaller braids per horse .
Braids are occasionally accented in white tape , which also helps them stay in throughout the day .
The forelock may be left unbraided ; this style is most common with stallions .
Braids are held in place by either yarn or rubber bands .
It is a common misconception that a dressage horse must be braided , however this is not the case , and some riders may choose for various reasons not to braid .
Horses are not permitted to wear &quot; visual enhancements &quot; that might be considered distracting , or that might influence the judge &apos;s perception of the horse .
Bangles , ribbons , or other decorations are not allowed in the horse &apos;s mane or tail .
Competitors are not allowed to use black hoof polish on white hooves .
Tail extensions are permitted in some countries , but not in FEI-sanctioned competitions .
The tail is usually not braided ( although it is permitted ) , because it may cause the horse to carry the tail stiffly .
Because the tail is an extension of the animal &apos;s spine , a supple tail is desirable as it shows that the horse is supple through its back .
The tail should be &quot; banged &quot; , or cut straight across ( usually above the fetlocks but below the hocks when held at the point where the horse naturally carries it ) .
The dock is pulled or trimmed to shape it and give the horse a cleaner appearance .
The bridle path is clipped or pulled , usually only 1 – 2 inches .
The animal &apos;s coat may be trimmed .
American stables almost always trim the muzzle , face , ears , and legs , while European stables do not have such a strict tradition and may leave different parts untrimmed .
Clear hoof polish may be applied before the horse enters the arena .
The horse is thoroughly clean .
The horse &apos;s saliva often forms &quot; foam &quot; about the horse &apos;s lips , which is generally considered to be a sign of the horse &apos;s submission and acceptance of the bit .
Some riders believe that foam should not be cleaned off the horse &apos;s mouth before entering the arena due to it being a sign of submission .
Conversely , some riders choose to wipe the foam from their horses &apos; mouths prior to entering the arena , as foam can land on the horses &apos; chests and legs .
It should be noted that the presence of foam does not necessarily indicate the horse &apos;s acceptance of the bit , as certain metals such as German silver may cause the horse &apos;s salivation to increase without full acceptance of the bit .
Quarter marks are sometimes seen , especially in the dressage phase of eventing .
However they are not currently in style for competitive dressage .
The turnout of a dressage horse is not taken into consideration in the marking of a test .
Rider clothing Dressage riders , like their horses , are dressed for formality .
In competition , they wear white , cream or pale-coloured breeches , often full-seat leather to help them &quot; stick &quot; in the saddle , with a white shirt and stock tie with a small pin .
Gloves are usually white , although less-experienced riders or those at the lower levels often opt for black , as white gloves tend to accentuate the movement of a less-experienced rider &apos;s unsteady hands .
The coat worn is usually solid black with metal buttons , although solid navy is also seen .
In upper-level classes , the riders wear a tailed jacket ( shadbelly ) with a yellow vest or vest points instead of a plain dressage coat .
Riders usually wear tall dress boots , although field boots or paddock boots with half chaps may be worn by riders at the lower levels .
Spurs are required at the upper levels , and riders must maintain a steady lower leg for proper use .
A whip may be carried in any competition except in a CDI or a national championship , and the length is regulated .
Whips are not permitted in eventing dressage when entering space around arena or during the test for FEI events .
Whips ( no longer than 120 cm ) are permitted in eventing dressage at any time for USEA tests , except USEF / USEA Championships and USEA Championship divisions .
If the dressage rider has long hair , it is typically worn in a bun with a hair net or show bow .
A hair net blends in with the rider &apos;s hair color , whereas a show bow combines a barrette or hair tie with a small bow and thick hair net , and is usually black .
Lower-level riders may use a derby , hunting cap , or ASTM / SEI-approved Equestrian helmet .
In the United States , junior riders and riders through Fourth Level at recognized competitions are required to wear an ASTM / SEI approved helmet to protect against head trauma in the event of a fall .
At the upper levels , a top hat that matches the rider &apos;s coat is traditionally worn , though use of helmets is legal and increasing in popularity .
At FEI competitions , members of the military , police , national studs , national schools , and national institutes retain the right to wear their service dress instead of the dress required of civilian riders.International level At the international level , dressage tests governed by the FEI are the Prix St. Georges , Intermediare I , Intermediare II , and Grand Prix .
The dressage tests performed at the Olympic Games dressage competition are Grand Prix .
This level of test demands the most skill and concentration from both horse and rider .
Movements included in Grand Prix dressage tests are : Piaffe A calm , composed , elevated trot in place ( although minimal movement forward is allowed and not penalized in competitions as it is the natural way of performing the movement .
In any case the horse should never move backwards and this is considered a serious fault ) : Passage A very collected trot , in which the horse has great elevation of stride and seems to pause between each stride ( it has a great amount of suspension in the stride ) .
A higher degree of collection causes a definite shift of impulsion to the hindquarters .
&quot; An understanding of load distribution between forelimbs and hindlimbs in relation to different riding techniques is vital to prevent wear-and-tear on the locomotor apparatus &quot; .
Extended gaits Usually done at the trot and canter , the horse lengthens its stride to the maximum length through great forward thrust and reach .
Grand Prix horses show amazing trot extensions .
Though not as visually impressive , equally important is the extended walk , which shows that the horse can easily relax and stretch in the midst of the more collected movements .
Collected gaits ( trot and canter ) A shortening of stride in which the horse brings its hindquarters more underneath himself and carries more weight on his hind end .
The tempo does not change , the horse simply shortens and elevates his stride .
Flying changes in sequence Informally called &quot; tempis &quot; or &quot; tempi changes &quot; at this level , The horse changes leads at the canter every stride ( one time tempis or &quot; oneseys &quot; ) , two strides ( two time tempis ) , three strides or four strides .
Pirouette A 360 degree turn in place , usually performed at the canter .
In a Freestyle to music ( kür ) test , a turn of up to 720 ° is permissible for Grand Prix .
( In levels lower than Grand Prix , a 180 degree pirouette may be performed . )
Half-pass A movement where the horse goes on a diagonal , moving sideways and forward at the same time , while bent slightly in the direction of movement .
Tests ridden at the Olympic Games are scored by a panel of seven international judges .
Each movement in each test receives a numeric score from 0 ( lowest ) to 10 ( highest ) and the resulting final score is then converted into a percentage , which is carried out to three decimal points .
The higher the percentage , the higher the score .
However , in eventing dressage the score is calculated by dividing the number of points achieved by the total possible points , then multiplied by 100 ( rounded to 2 decimal points ) and subtracted from 100 .
Thus , a lower score is better than a higher score .
Olympic team medals are won by the teams with the highest combined percentages from their best three rides in the Grand Prix test .
Once the team medals are determined , horses and riders compete for individual medals .
The team competition serves as the first individual qualifier , in that the top 25 horse / rider combinations from the Grand Prix test move on to the next round .
The second individual qualifier is the Grand Prix Special test , which consists of Grand Prix movements arranged in a different pattern .
For those 25 riders , the scores from the Grand Prix and the Grand Prix Special are then combined and the resulting top 15 horse / rider combinations move on to the individual medal competition — the crowd-pleasing Grand Prix Freestyle to Music ( Kür ) .
For their freestyles , riders and horses perform specially choreographed patterns to music .
At this level , the freestyle tests may contain all the Grand Prix movements , as well as double canter pirouettes , pirouettes in piaffe , and half-pass in passage .
For the freestyle , judges award technical marks for the various movements , as well as artistic marks .
In the case of a tie , the ride with the higher artistic marks wins .
Training Scale Competitive dressage training in the U.S. is based on a progression of six steps developed by the German National Equestrian Foundation .
This system is arranged in a pyramid or sequential fashion , with “ rhythm and regularity ” at the start of the pyramid and “ collection ” at the end .
The training scale is helpful and effective as a guide for the training of any horse , but has come to be most closely associated with dressage .
Despite its appearance , the training scale is not meant to be a rigid format .
Instead , each level is built on as the horse progresses in training : so a Grand Prix horse would work on the refinement of the first levels of the pyramid , instead of focusing on only the final level : “ collection . ” The levels are also interconnected .
For example , a crooked horse cannot develop impulsion , and a horse that is not relaxed will be less likely to travel with a rhythmic gait .
However , this training scale as presented below is a translation from the German to the English .
As such , it is possibly not as accurate as it could be .
It has been suggested , for example , that Losgelassenheit might be more accurately translated as &quot; Suppleness . &quot;
Rhythm and regularity ( Takt ) Rhythm , gait , tempo , and regularity should be the same on straight and bending lines , through lateral work , and through transitions .
Rhythm refers to the sequence of the footfalls , which should only include the pure walk , pure trot , and pure canter .
The regularity , or purity , of the gait includes the evenness and levelness of the stride .
Once a rider can obtain pure gaits , or can avoid irregularity , the combination may be fit to do a more difficult exercise .
Even in the very difficult piaffe there is still regularity : the horse &quot; trots on the spot &quot; in place , raising the front and hind legs in rhythm .
Relaxation ( Losgelassenheit ) The second level of the pyramid is relaxation ( looseness ) .
Signs of looseness in the horse may be seen by an even stride that is swinging through the back and causing the tail to swing like a pendulum , looseness at the poll , a soft chewing of the bit , and a relaxed blowing through the nose .
The horse makes smooth transitions , is easy to position from side to side , and willingly reaches down into the contact as the reins are lengthened .
Contact ( Anlehnung ) Contact — the third level of the pyramid — is the result of the horse ’ s pushing power , and should never be achieved by the pulling of the rider ’ s hands .
The rider encourages the horse to stretch into soft hands that allow the horse to lift the base of the neck , coming up into the bridle , and should always follow the natural motion of the animal ’ s head .
The horse should have equal contact in both reins .
Impulsion ( Schwung ) The pushing power ( thrust ) of the horse is called impulsion , and is the fourth level of the training pyramid .
Impulsion is created by storing the energy of engagement ( the forward reaching of the hind legs under the body ) .
Proper impulsion is achieved by means of : Correct driving aids of the rider Relaxation of the horse Throughness ( Durchlässigkeit ) : the flow of energy through the horse from front to back and back to front .
The musculature of the horse is connected , supple , elastic , and unblocked , and the rider ’ s aids go freely through the horse .
Impulsion can occur at the walk , trot and canter .
It is highly important to establish good , forward movement and impulsion at the walk , as achieving desirable form in the trot and canter relies heavily on the transition from a good , supple , forward walk .
Impulsion not only encourages correct muscle and joint use , but also engages the mind of the horse , focusing it on the rider and , particularly at the walk and trot , allowing for relaxation and dissipation of nervous energy .
Dressage Dressage ( a French term , most commonly translated to mean &quot; training &quot; ) is a highly skilled form of riding performed in exhibition and competition , as well as an &quot; art &quot; sometimes pursued solely for the sake of mastery .
As an equestrian sport defined by the International Equestrian Federation , dressage is &quot; the highest expression of horse training &quot; where &quot; horse and rider are expected to perform from memory a series of predetermined movements . &quot;
Competitions are held at all levels from amateur to the Olympic Games and World Equestrian Games .
Its fundamental purpose is to develop , through standardized progressive training methods , a horse &apos;s natural athletic ability and willingness to perform , thereby maximizing its potential as a riding horse .
At the peak of a dressage horse &apos;s gymnastic development , the horse responds smoothly to a skilled rider &apos;s minimal aids .
The rider is relaxed and appears effort-free while the horse willingly performs the requested movement .
The discipline has a rich history with ancient roots in the writings of Xenophon .
Modern dressage has evolved as an important equestrian pursuit since the Renaissance when Federico Grisone &apos;s &quot; The Rules of Riding &quot; was published in 1550 , the first treatise on equitation in over a thousand years since Xenophon &apos;s On Horsemanship .
Much about training systems used today reflects practices of classical dressage .
In modern dressage competition , successful training at the various levels is demonstrated through the performance of &quot; tests &quot; , prescribed series of movements ridden within a standard arena .
Judges evaluate each movement on the basis of an objective standard appropriate to the level of the test and assign each movement a score from zero to ten – zero being &quot; not executed &quot; and 10 being &quot; excellent &quot; .
A score of 9 is very good and is a high mark , while a competitor achieving all 6s ( or 60 % overall ) should be considering moving on to the next level .
Dressage horses All riding horses can benefit from use of dressage principles and training techniques .
The most popular horse breeds seen at the Olympics and other international FEI competitions are warmblood horses bred for dressage .
In classical dressage training and performances that involve the &quot; airs above the ground &quot; ( described below ) , the &quot; baroque &quot; breeds of horses are popular and purposely bred for these specialties .
Arena There are two sizes of arenas : small and standard .
Each has letters assigned to positions around the arena for dressage tests to specify where movements are to be performed .
Cones with letters on them are positioned on the sidelines of the arena for reference as to where a movement is to be performed .
The small arena is 20 by 40 m ( 66 by 131 ft ) and is used for the lower levels of eventing in the dressage phase , as well as for some pure dressage competitions at lower levels .
Its letters around the outside edge , starting from the point of entry and moving clockwise , are A-K-E-H-C-M-B-F .
Letters also mark locations along the &quot; center line &quot; in the middle of the arena .
Moving down the center line from A , they are D-X-G , with X being directly between E and B.
The standard arena is 20 by 60 m ( 66 by 197 ft ) , and is used for tests in both pure dressage and eventing .
The standard dressage arena letters are A-K-V-E-S-H-C-M-R-B-P-F .
The letters on the long sides of the arena , nearest the corners , are 6 m ( 20 ft ) in from the corners , and are 12 m ( 39 ft ) apart from each other .
The letters along the center line are D-L-X-I-G , with X again being halfway down the arena .
There is speculation as to why these letters were chosen .
Most commonly it is believed because the German cavalry had a 20 × 60-meter area in-between the barracks which had the letters posted above the doors .
As well as the center line , the arena also has two &quot; quarter lines &quot; which lie between the center line and the long side of the arena , however these are infrequently , if ever , used for competition except in a freestyle .
At the start of the test , the horse enters the arena at an opening at A.
Ideally this opening is then closed for the duration of the test ; however , this is not always logistically possible , particularly at smaller competitions with few volunteers .
Judges Judges are registered through their national federation depending on the judge &apos;s experience and training , with the highest qualified being registered with the FEI for international competition .
Judges are strictly regulated to ensure as consistent marking as possible within the limits of subjectivity , and in FEI competitions , it is expected that all judges &apos; final percentage be within five percent of each other .
There is always a judge sitting at C , although for upper-level competition , there can be up to seven judges at different places around the arena — at C , E , B , K , F , M , and H — which allows the horse to be seen in each movement from all angles .
This helps prevent certain faults from going unnoticed , which may be difficult for a judge to see from only one area of the arena .
For example , the horse &apos;s straightness going across the diagonal may be assessed by judges at M and H. Although the judge &apos;s positions are known by their closest letter , only C , B , &amp; E are actually directly behind their respective marker , with the other judges being on the short sides ( on a plane with C , and two metres in from the edge of the arena for M &amp; H , and at the A end of the arena and five metres in from the long side of the arena for F &amp; K ) rather than on the longside where the letter would seem to indicate .
Competition Dressage competitions consist of a series of individual tests with an increasing level of difficulty .
The most accomplished horse and rider teams perform FEI tests , written by the international equestrian governing body called the Fédération Équestre Internationale or FEI .
The highest level of modern competition is at the Grand Prix level .
This is the level test ridden in the prestigious international competitions ( CDIs ) , such as the Olympic games , Dressage World Cup , and World Equestrian Games .
Dressage governed by the rules of the FEI include the following levels : &quot; small tour &quot; ( Prix St. Georges and Intermediate I ) Intermediate A , Intermediate B and &quot; big tour &quot; ( Intermediate II , Grand Prix and Grand Prix Special ) .
In addition , there are four to six lower levels , occasionally more , regulated in individual nations by their respective national federation ( such as the USDF in America , British Dressage , Dressage Australia etc . ) .
The lower levels ask horses for basic gaits , relatively large circles , and a lower level of collection than the international levels .
Lateral movements are not required in the earliest levels , and movements such as the leg yield , shoulder-in , or haunches-in are gradually introduced as the horse progresses , until the point at which the horse can compete in the FEI levels .
Apart from competition , there is the tradition of classical dressage , in which the traditional training of dressage is pursued as an art form .
The traditions of the masters who originated Dressage are kept alive by the Spanish Riding School in Vienna , Austria , Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre in Lisbon , Portugal , and the Cadre Noir in Saumur , France .
This type of schooling is also a part of Portuguese and Spanish bullfighting exhibitions .
Tests Dressage tests are the formalized sequence of a number of dressage movements used in competition .
Although horses and riders are competing against each other , tests are completed by one horse and rider combination at a time , and horses and riders are judged against a common standard , rather than having their performance scored relative to the other competitors .
At the upper levels , tests for international competitions , including the Olympics , are issued under the auspices of the FEI .
At the lower levels , and as part of dressage training each country authorizes its own set of tests .
For example , in the US it is the United States Equestrian Federation and the United States Dressage Federation .
In Great Britain , dressage is overseen by British Dressage .
Pony Clubs also produce their own tests , including basic walk / trot tests which cater for child riders .
The Annual Pony Club National Championships include a dressage element with very high level riders attending , most notable being Callum Barker ( Emmanuel School ) who is known for his Dressage skill and well groomed pony .
Each test is segmented into a number of sequential block which may contain one or more movements .
Each block is generally scored between zero and ten on a scale such as the following : 10 Excellent 9 Very good 8 Good 7 Fairly good 6 Satisfactory 5 Marginal 4 Insufficient 3 Fairly Bad 2 Bad 1 Very bad 0 Not executed Since 2011 , all international tests , and some national tests have also allowed half marks ( 0.5 – 9.5 ) in all blocks .
Along with each mark a &quot; comment &quot; may be given , which can describe things a rider and horse lack during the movement , or what they have .
Any of the definitions of each numeric mark can only be used in the comment if the mark corresponds with the definition In addition to marks for the dressage movements , marks are also awarded for more general attributes such as the horse &apos;s gaits , submission , impulsion and the rider ’ s performance .
Some segments are given increased weight by the use of a multiplier , or coefficient .
Coefficients are typically given a value of 2 , which then doubles the marks given for that segment .
Movements that are given a coefficient are generally considered to be particularly important to the horse &apos;s progression in training , and should be competently executed prior to moving up to the next level of competition .
The scores for the general attributes of gait , submission , impulsion , and rider performance mentioned above are scored using a coefficient .
Scribing Scribing ( also known as pencilling or writing ) is the writing down of the scores and comments of judges at dressage events so that the judge can concentrate on the performance .
In addition to this , the scribe should check the identity of each competitor , and ensure that the test papers are complete and signed before handing them to the scorers .
The scribe should have some knowledge of dressage terminology , be smartly dressed and have legible handwriting .
The scribe should also be professional in manner , neutral and not engage in small talk or make comments .
It is permissible to use abbreviations provided they are accepted and intelligible .
According to the United States Dressage Federation , &quot; Anyone can volunteer at a schooling show to scribe .
Schooling shows are not recognized as official shows but are a great way to practice riding tests or to learn to scribe for a judge .
Once you have scribed at a schooling show and at the lower levels , you may ask to scribe at a recognized show and perhaps even the FEI levels of competition . &quot;
Scribing or pencilling is also an integral part of a judge &apos;s training as they look to become accredited or upgrade to a higher level .
Classical dressage Classical dressage evolved from cavalry movements and training for the battlefield , and has since developed into the competitive dressage seen today .
Classical riding is the art of riding in harmony with , rather than against , the horse .
Correct classical riding only occurs when the rider has a good seat and a correct and well-balanced body position , moves with the horse &apos;s motion , and applies and times the aids correctly .
Natural abilities of the horse The origins of classical dressage and collection lie in the natural ability of the horse and its movements in the wild .
In fact , most modern definitions of dressage state that the goal is to have the horse perform under saddle with the degree of athleticism and grace that it naturally shows when free .
Horses naturally use collection when playing , fighting , competing and courting with each other .
When trying to impress other horses , they make themselves look bigger , just as other animals do .
They achieve this by lifting the forehand , raising the neck and making it bigger by flexing the poll , while at the same time transforming their gaits to emphasize more upwards movement .
When fighting , the horse will collect because in collection he can produce lightning speed reactions for kicking , rearing , spinning , striking with the front feet , bucking and jumping .
This natural ability to collect is visible in every horse of any breed , and probably inspired early trainers to reproduce that kind of behavior in more controlled circumstances .
This origin also points out why , according to most Classical dressage trainers , every healthy horse , regardless of its breed , can perform classical dressage movements , including the Haute Ecole jumps , or Airs above the ground , even though it may perform them a little differently from the ideal performance due to the build of its body .
The ultimate goal of dressage training is to develop a horse to its ability as an athlete : maximum performance with a minimum of effort .
The training scale ( as set for in the German riding instruction ) is to physically develop the horse in a consistent manner with longevity in mind .
Dressage is fitness training and needs to be treated as such , with thought , compassion and patience .
A history of classical dressage The Western World &apos;s earliest complete surviving work on many of the principles of classical dressage is Xenophon &apos;s On Horsemanship .
Xenophon emphasized training the horse through kindness and reward .
In the 15th century , brute force training fell out of favour , while artistry in riding came to the fore .
Along with these developments came an increase in indoor riding .
The Renaissance gave rise to a new and more enlightened approach to riding , as a part of the general cultivation of the classical arts .
By the Victorian age , indoor riding had become a sophisticated art , with both rider and horse spending many years perfecting their form .
Gueriniere , Eisenberg , Ruy d &apos;Andrade and Marialva wrote treatises on technique and theory during these periods .
The horses were trained to perform a number of airs above the ground ( or &quot; sauts d &apos;école &quot; ) movements , which could enable their riders to escape if surrounded , or to fight more easily .
These included movements such as levade , capriole , courbette , and ballotade .
Movements still seen today in competitive dressage include the piaffe , passage , and half-pass .
Classical dressage vs. competitive dressage Modern dressage evolved from the classical school , although it now exists in a somewhat different form from its ancestor .
Competitive dressage is an international sport ranging from beginner levels to the Olympics .
Unlike classical dressage , competitive dressage does not require the airs above ground , which most horses cannot perform well even with correct training , due to physical limitations .
Instead , competitive dressage focuses on movements such as the piaffe , passage , half-pass , extended trot , pirouette , and tempi changes .
In theory , competitive dressage should follow the same principles as classical dressage .
However , there has been criticism by some riders for the trend at all levels for &quot; quick fixes &quot; and incorrect training that makes the horse appear correct , but that is in fact neglecting the fundamentals .
Classical riders criticize such training methods on the grounds that they are biomechanically incompatible with correct movement , are painful to the horse , and cause long-term physical damage .
These short-cuts usually catch up to the rider as they move up the levels and need to be corrected to perform certain movements .
While these modern methods , such as the highly controversial rollkur technique , can produce winning animals , classical dressage riders argue that such training is incorrect and even abusive .
It is also believed by some that competitive dressage does not always reward the most correctly trained horse and rider , especially at the lower levels .
For example , some riders who consider themselves to be training classically would not ask their horse to hold his head near-vertical when he first began training , and this would be penalized at the lower levels of competitive dressage , marked down because the horse is not considered to be correctly on the bit .
Other riders , who also would consider themselves classically trained , would disagree , saying that if a horse is not ready to travel in a correct outline ( on the bit ) he is not ready for competition , and this is the reason such horses would be marked down .
The highest form of classical riding , as well as dressage , high school dressage , or haute école , takes years for both the horse and rider to master .
When a horse is advanced in its training , it can perform not only Grand Prix dressage movements such as collected and extended gaits , passage and piaffe , but some can also perform certain &quot; Airs Above the Ground , &quot; although usually a horse will only be trained in one air , and only if it is particularly able .
The School Jumps Main article : Airs above the ground The &quot; high school &quot; or &apos; haute ecole &apos; school jumps , popularly known as the &quot; airs above the ground , &quot; include the courbette , capriole , levade , and ballotade .
Though these movements are said to come from when the horse was used in war , in their modern form , it is unlikely the airs were used in actual battle , as all but the Capriole expose the horse &apos;s sensitive underbelly to the weapons of foot soldiers , and it is more likely that they were training exercises used off the battlefield .
The courbette is a movement where the horse balances on its hindlegs and jumps , keeping its forelegs off the ground , thus it &quot; hops &quot; on its hindlegs .
The capriole is a movement where the horse leaps into the air and pulls his forelegs in towards his chest at the height of elevation , while kicking out with his hindlegs .
The levade is a movement where the horse is balanced on its haunches at a 45 degree angle from the ground .
It requires great control and balance , and is very strenuous .
There are two main breeds that are most well known for their abilities for airs above ground : the Lipizzaner and the Andalusian .
Other breeds that are known for their abilities in High School dressage include the Friesian and Lusitano .
The Spanish Riding School in Vienna , as well as the Cadre Noir in Saumur , still practice and teach the Haute Ecole .
The Spanish Riding School exclusively uses Lipizzan stallions for their work .
Today the only remaining large schools of classical dressage are the Cadre Noir , the Spanish Riding School , the Royal Andalusian School of Equestrian Art in Jerez de la Frontera , the Portuguese School of Equestrian Art in Lisbon , the Mexican Haute École of Riders Domecq in Texcoco and the South African Lipizzaners in South Africa .
There are independent classical dressage trainers who also endeavor to keep this branch of the art alive , including the Portuguese riding master Nuno Oliveira and his students , Bent Branderup and the American clinician , Paul Belasik .
Dressage masters and authors Xenophon ( 427-355 BC ) : Greek general , the earliest European master with surviving treatises , wrote On Horsemanship which advocated the use of sympathetic training of the horse .
Despite living over 2000 years ago , his ideas are still widely praised Federico Grisone ( mid-16th century ) : one of the few to write on horsemanship to that point since Xenophon .
Was considered a master of his time ; his methods are viewed as harsh and cruel by modern standards Giovanni Battista Pignatelli ( mid- to late-16th century ) Salomon de La Broue ( 1530 – 1610 ) Antoine de Pluvinel ( 1555 – 1620 ) : the first of the French riding masters , author of L ’ Instruction du Roy en l ’ Exercise de Monter a Cheval , tutor to King Louis XIII , and is the first notable writer to advocate for gentle training since Xenophon William Cavendish , 1st Duke of Newcastle ( 1592 – 1676 ) : Master of Horse to Charles II of England François Robichon de La Guérinière ( 1688 – 1751 ) : taught the classical position still used today , introduced the flying change , and had great impact on the Spanish Riding School Maximilian Weyrother ( 1783 – 1833 ) director of the Spanish Riding School François Baucher ( 1796 – 1873 ) : introduced the one-tempi flying change , his method , which is still hotly contested , was based on the fact that the horse &apos;s jaw is the source of all resistance ; there are two &apos; manners &apos; by which Baucher is known , the first a more dominant form of riding comparable to the modern rollkur , the second more associated with &apos; lightness &apos; and a lessening of the hands and legs as the horse progresses Count Antoine Cartier D &apos;Aure ( 1799 – 1863 ) Gustav Steinbrecht ( 1808 – 1885 ) James Fillis ( 1834-1913 ) Alois Podhajsky ( 1898 – 1973 ) : became director of the Spanish Riding School in 1939 ; his books in English translation form the basis of Classical Dressage today Nuno Oliveira ( 1925 – 1989 ) Egon von Neindorff ( 1923 – 2004 ) : author of The Art of Classical Horsemanship Airs above the ground The airs above the ground or school jumps are a series of higher-level , Haute ecole , classical dressage movements in which the horse leaves the ground .
They include the capriole , the courbette , the mezair , the croupade and the levade .
None are typically seen in modern competitive dressage .
They are performed by horses of various riding academies such as the Spanish Riding School in Vienna and the Cadre Noir in Saumur , and may be seen in other dressage performances .
The levade and courbette are a particular feature of the Doma Menorquina , the riding tradition of the island of Menorca .
Horses such as the Andalusian , Lusitano , Lipizzan and Menorquín are the breeds most often trained to perform the airs today , in part due to their powerfully conformed hindquarters , which allow them the strength to perform these difficult movements .
There were originally seven airs , many of which were used to build into the movements performed today .
There is a popular conception that these movements were originally taught to horses for military purposes , and indeed both the Spanish Riding School and the Cadre Noir are military foundations .
However , while agility was necessary on the battlefield , most of the airs as performed today would have exposed the vulnerable underbelly of the horse to the weapons of foot soldiers .
It is therefore more likely that the airs were exercises to develop the military horse and rider , rather than to be employed in combat .
Horses are usually taught each air on the long rein without a rider , which is less strenuous for the animal .
However , each movement is meant to eventually be performed under a rider .
The pesade and the levade The pesade and levade are the first airs taught to the High School horse , and it is from these that all other airs are taught .
In the pesade , the horse raises its forehand off the ground and tucks the forelegs evenly , carrying all weight on the hindquarters , to form a 45 degree angle with the ground .
The levade was first taught at the beginning of the 20th century , asking the horse to hold a position approximately 30 – 35 degrees from the ground .
Unlike the pesade , which is more of a test of balance , the decreased angle makes the levade an extremely strenuous position to hold , and requires a greater effort from the horse .
Therefore , many horses are not capable of a good-quality levade .
The levade is also a transition movement between work on the ground and the airs above the ground .
Neither of these movements are equivalent to rearing , as they require precise control , excellent balance , and a great deal of strength , and are the product of correct training , rather than resistance from the horse .
The horse is asked to enter the pesade or levade from the piaffe , which asks the horse to increasingly engage its hindquarters , lowering them toward the ground and bringing the hind legs more toward its center of gravity .
This gives the viewer the impression that the horse appears to sink down in back and rise in front .
The position is held for a number of seconds , and then the horse quietly puts the forelegs back on the ground and proceeds at the walk , or stands at the halt .
The levade is considered to be pinnacle of collection , as the horse carries all weight on the back legs , and has an extreme tucking of the hindquarters and coiling of the loins .
The capriole , the croupade and the ballotade In the capriole ( meaning leap of a goat ) , the horse jumps from a raised position of the forehand straight up into the air , kicks out with the hind legs , and lands more or less on all four legs at the same time .
It requires an enormously powerful horse to perform correctly , and is considered the most difficult of all the airs above the ground .
It is first introduced with the croupade , in which the horse does not kick out at the height of elevation , but keeps the hind legs tucked tightly under , and remains parallel to the ground .
The horse is then taught the ballotade .
In this movement , the horse &apos;s hind hooves are positioned so one can see its shoes if watching from behind , but the horse is not asked to kick out .
When the horse demonstrates proficiency in the ballotade , the capriole is introduced .
The courbette In the courbette , the horse raises its forehand off the ground , tucks up forelegs evenly , and then jumps forward , never allowing the forelegs to touch down , in a series of &quot; hops &quot; .
Extremely strong and talented horses can perform five or more leaps forward before having to touch down with the forelegs , although it is more usual to see a series of three or four leaps .
The courbette , like the capriole , is first introduced through the easier croupade .
Mezair In the mezair , the horse rears up and strikes out with its forelegs .
It is similar to a series of levades with a forward motion ( not in place ) , with the horse gradually bringing its legs further under himself in each successive movement and lightly touching the ground with the front legs before pushing up again .
The mezair was originally called the courbette by the old dressage masters .
It is no longer practiced at the Spanish Riding School .
Piaffe The piaffe is a dressage movement where the horse is in a highly collected and cadenced trot , in place or nearly in place .
The center of gravity of the horse should be more towards the hind end , with the hindquarters slightly lowered and great bending of the joints in the hind legs .
The front end of the horse is highly mobile , free , and light , with great flexion in the joints of the front legs , and the horse remains light in the hand .
The horse should retain a clear and even rhythm , show great impulsion , and ideally should have a moment of suspension between the foot falls .
As in all dressage , the horse should perform in a calm manner and remain on the bit with a round back .
The piaffe was originally used in battle to keep the horse focused , warm , and moving , ready to move forward into battle .
In modern times , the piaffe is mostly taught as an upper level movement in Classical dressage and as a Grand Prix level movement .
Additionally , it is needed to develop the levade and from that , the airs above the ground .
Correct piaffe work The following are elements of the correct piaffe : The piaffe is straight and comes from the rider containing the horse &apos;s desire to go forward .
The legs do not move out to the side or cross .
The horse lowers his hindquarters , collects , and raises the shoulders by taking weight onto the hindquarters , rather than hollowing the back and piaffing with the hindquarters trailing out behind .
Bending of the joints is not always a good indication of true collection ( and therefore a correct piaffe ) .
It is possible to perform a piaffe-like movement with good bend in the legs while the horse remains hollow and on the forehand .
This can especially be seen in horses trained to trot in place by holding them back while asking the hindlegs to bend by applying the whip on the hocks .
The horse will bend the hocks , but will not lower the hindquarters .
The horse is not to raise the hind legs higher than the front , which comes when the horse is on the forehand , nor show exaggerated bending of the front legs without true collection .
The horse remains relaxed and supple .
An incorrect piaffe has short , jerky steps .
The horse does not move his fore legs backwards toward his hind legs , so that they are more under his body , but rather keep them perpendicular to the ground .
The horse remains at or in front of the vertical , with his poll as the highest point .
The horse maintains the rhythm and tempo of the trot .
Passage ( dressage ) The passage is a movement seen in upper-level dressage , in which the horse performs a highly elevated and extremely powerful trot .
The horse is very collected and moves with great impulsion .
The passage differs from the working , medium , collected , and extended trot in that the horse raises a diagonal pair high off the ground and suspends the leg for a longer period than seen in the other trot types .
The hindquarters are very engaged , and the knees and hocks are flexed more than the other trot types .
The horse appears to trot in slow motion , making it look as if it is dancing .
The passage is first introduced in the dressage intermediaire test II .
A horse must be well-confirmed in its training to perform the passage , and must be proficient in collecting while remaining energetic , calm , and supple .
The horse must also have built up the correct muscles to do the strenuous movement .
Half-pass The half-pass is a lateral movement seen in dressage , in which the horse moves forward and sideways at the same time .
Unlike the easier leg-yield , the horse is bent in the direction of travel , slightly around the rider &apos;s inside leg .
The outside hind and forelegs should cross over the inside legs , with the horse &apos;s body parallel to the arena wall and his forehand leading .
The horse should remain forward , balanced , and bent , moving with cadence .
The inside hind leg remains engaged throughout the half-pass , and the horse should not lose its rhythm .
The half-pass is a variation of haunches-in ( travers ) , executed on a diagonal line instead of along the wall .
At higher levels it is used to perform a counter-change of hand , combining more than two half-passes with changes of direction in a zig-zag pattern .
The Half-Pass vs. the Leg-Yield The half-pass requires more balance , engagement , and collection from a horse than the leg-yield .
This is because the horse is slightly bent in the direction of movement in the half-pass .
In the leg-yield , the horse is fairly straight or looking slightly away from the direction of travel .
The Purpose of the Half-Pass The half-pass is a schooling movement that requires the horse to engage the hindquarters and increase its impulsion , it can therefore be used to improve both collection or impulsion .
The half-pass is commonly seen in dressage tests beginning at the United States Dressage Federation third level .
Performing the maneuver A common method of introducing the half-pass : riding a half 10-meter circle , and half-passing from the centerline back to the rail .
In half-pass the horse is looking into the direction of travel , bent around the rider &apos;s inner leg , with the forelegs slightly leading and the outside legs crossing in front of the inside legs .
The half-pass is usually taught after the haunches-in is well confirmed .
It may first be introduced by riding a half-10-meter circle from the long side to the centerline , or a half-volte , and then half-passing in .
The circle naturally places the horse &apos;s body in the correct bend , and helps to encourage the engagement needed for the movement .
The outside hind leg must step well under the horse &apos;s body to push the animal forward and sideways .
A rider uses an active outside leg slightly behind the neutral position to ask the horse to step forward and under .
The outside rein maintains the correct bend and contains the energy of the horse , the inside leg keeps the horse moving forward , and the inside rein guides the forehand in the direction of movement .
The rider also uses his or her inside seat bone to help maintain bend .
If the rider is off-center or twisted , the horse will also be crooked or off-balance .
If the horse loses quality in the movement , such as lack of correct bend ( haunches leading or inside shoulder falling inward ) , loss of rhythm , or stiffness , the rider straightens the horse and rides forward .
The beginning and the end of the movement needs special attention concerning control and balance .
Trot The trot is a two-beat diagonal gait of the horse where the diagonal pairs of legs move forward at the same time with a moment of suspension between each beat .
It has a wide variation in possible speeds , but averages about 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) .
A very slow trot is sometimes referred to as a jog .
An extremely fast trot has no special name , but in harness racing , the trot of a Standardbred is faster than the gallop of the average non-racehorse , and has been clocked at over 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) .
On June 29 , 2014 at Pocono Downs in Pennsylvania the Swedish standardbred Sebastian K trotted a mile in 1 minute , 49 seconds ( quarters were passed at 26 : 2 , 55 : 3 and 1,21 : 4 ) .
This is equivalent to a 1000-pace in 1.07,7 or 53,14 kilometers per hour or 33 miles per hour .
From the standpoint of the balance of the horse , the trot is a very stable gait and does not require the horse to make major balancing motions with its head and neck .
Due to its many variations , the trot is a common gait that the horse is worked in for dressage .
Eadweard Muybridge was the first to prove , by photography , in 1872 that there is a &quot; moment of suspension &quot; or &quot; unsupported transit &quot; during the trot gait .
Types Jog trot Collected trot Working trot Medium trot Extended trot Racing trot Park trot Depending on the amount of engagement and collection of the horse , the trot can generally be classified as &quot; working &quot; , &quot; collected &quot; , or &quot; extended &quot; .
By the rhythm , one may distinguish a true , two-beat square trot when each diagonal pair of hoofs hits the ground at the same moment from a four-beat intermediate ambling gait , such as the fox trot or the &quot; trocha &quot; sometimes seen in the Paso Fino .
Different speeds and types of trots are described by the following terms : Jog trot , as seen in western horses , is a slow , relaxed trot lacking the suspension of a working trot and with shorter strides .
It is easy to ride because there is less &quot; bounce &quot; .
The head of the horse is carried low while the hindquarters are engaged and underneath the horse , and there is less impulsion than in a dressage-style collected trot .
Collected trot : A very engaged trot where most of the horse &apos;s weight is carried toward the hindquarters .
The frame is compressed and the stride length is shorter than any of the other trots with the horse taking higher steps .
The horse is lighter and more mobile in the collected trot .
Slow trot ( harness ) or Road gait ( roadster ) : Is slower than a working trot , but faster than a jog trot .
This gait is one of the gaits used in harness classes at horse shows .
Working trot or Trot : The stride length ( note : some breeds have naturally varied strides ) is &quot; normal &quot; for the horse and is the natural trot of the horse when under saddle .
It is a gait between the collected trot and medium trot .
Medium trot : A trot that is more engaged and rounder than the working trot with moderately extended strides and good , solid impulsion .
The medium trot lies between the working and the extended trot .
Park trot : Sometimes simply called a Trot in a given class and seen in saddle seat and fine harness classes for Saddlebreds , Arabians and Morgans .
It is a showy , flashy trot with extreme elevation of the knees ( forearm is horizontal or higher and the hind legs are extremely flexed ) .
The head is held high and at times a horse may hollow its back and lose cadence in an attempt to achieve high action in front .
The hindquarters must be engaged for it to be properly performed .
Lengthened trot : A trot with lengthened strides .
It differs from the more advanced extended trot in that it does not require the horse to bring its weight as far back on its hindquarters .
Road trot or Show at Speed : As seen in roadster classes , is a gait similar to a racing trot , but much slower ( suitable for an arena setting ) .
The horse &apos;s head is collected , the stride is at maximum length , and the step is high and animated .
Extended trot : An engaged trot with long strides where the horse stretches its frame and lengthens its strides to the greatest degree possible .
The horse has a great amount of suspension .
The back is round and the horse &apos;s head just in front and vertical .
Racing trot : As seen in harness racing horses that race at a trot , such as Standardbred .
The stride is at its maximum length with a great deal of suspension .
The hind leg in a diagonal pair may begin to hit the ground before the front .
Unlike the extended trot , the neck is not round but is extended out .
As of September 2013 , the North American speed record for a racing trot under saddle at one mile is 1 : 59 , or 30.25 miles per hour ( 48.68 km / h ) Haute Ecole variations on the trot Passage Piaffe Two variations of the trot are specially trained in advanced dressage horses : the Piaffe and the Passage .
The Piaffe is essentially created by asking the horse to trot in place , with very little forward motion .
The Passage ( rhymes with &quot; massage &quot; ) is an exaggerated slow motion trot .
Both require tremendous collection , careful training and considerable physical conditioning for a horse to perform .
Riding technique Depending on the horse and its speed , a trot can be difficult for a rider to sit because the body of the horse actually drops a bit between beats and bounces up again when the next set of legs strike the ground .
Each time another diagonal pair of legs hits the ground , the rider can be jolted upwards out of the saddle and meet the horse with some force on the way back down .
Therefore , at most speeds above a jog , especially in English riding disciplines , most riders post to the trot , rising up and down in rhythm with the horse to avoid being jolted .
Posting is easy on the horse &apos;s back , and once mastered is also easy on the rider .
To not be jostled out of the saddle and to not harm the horse by bouncing on its back , riders must learn specific skills in order to sit the trot .
Most riders learn to sit a slow jog trot without bouncing .
A skilled rider can ride a powerfully extended trot without bouncing , but to do so requires well-conditioned back and abdominal muscles , and to do so for long periods is tiring for even experienced riders .
A fast , uncollected , racing trot , such as that of the harness racing horse , is virtually impossible to sit .
Because the trot is such a safe and efficient gait for a horse , learning to ride the trot correctly is an important component in almost all equestrian disciplines , particularly for equitation riders .
&quot; Gaited &quot; or &quot; ambling &quot; horses , which have smooth 4-beat intermediate gaits that replace or supplement the trot , are popular with riders who prefer for various reasons not to have to ride at a trot .
There are three ways the trot may be ridden : Sitting : The rider &apos;s seat remains in the saddle the whole time while following the motion of the horse and without bouncing .
This is required for show ring western riding and preferred in dressage , especially at the upper levels .
Sitting the trot gives the rider optimum control , because he or she can use the seat and weight to ask the horse to make upward or downward transitions , turns , and / or to decrease or increase impulsion .
It is also a test of equitation by proving that the rider can quietly move with the horse .
The jog , which is the preferred gait of western horses , is generally smoother and less-bouncy than the working and extended trot of the English-style horse .
Sitting can be very tiring for the rider , especially if performed by riders who have not built up their stomach and back muscles , or if riders are on an extremely powerful mount with a big trot .
To sit the trot , there is a slight forward and back movement of the lower back and stomach as the rider &apos;s hips follow both the up and down and side-to-side motion of the horse .
To absorb the impact of the trot , the rider relaxes through the hips and the stomach and lower back , as well as the legs .
The rider &apos;s upper body remains upright and quiet .
The rider &apos;s hands remain steady .
The lower legs remain relaxed and only come into play when the rider gives a leg aid .
If a rider cannot sit the trot and is bounced around , the rising trot is preferable , because not only is the rider uncomfortable , the constant slamming of the rider onto the horse is uncomfortable for the horse .
As a result , it will hollow its back and stiffen its movement .
Rising or Posting : The rider makes an up-and-down movement each stride , rising out of the saddle for one beat and lowering ( sits ) for the second beat .
When the rising trot is performed correctly , it is comfortable for the rider and easy on the horse .
This is preferred for show jumping , hunt seat , eventing ( the jumping phases ) , saddle seat , lower-level dressage , and most other English-type riding as well as endurance riding .
Although this does not provide as much control as sitting , it frees the horse &apos;s back .
In the rising trot , the rider allows the horse &apos;s movement to throw his or her seat a bit out of the saddle .
When coming back down , the seat touches down lightly rather than slamming down on the horse &apos;s back .
Except in saddle seat riding , rider &apos;s shoulders maintain a slight forward incline throughout the rising trot , instead of the upright , vertical position seen in sitting trot .
The shoulders and lower legs remain in relatively the same position when the rider is both rising and sitting and the hands also stay in the same position as the rider rises and sits .
Half-seat or Two-point : Also called a jumping position .
Sometimes used synonymously , the half-seat variation involves the rider getting the seat bones off the saddle and keeping soft contact with the pelvis , and two-point variation involves the rider raising the seat and pelvic bones .
In both cases , the rider remains off the saddle and does not sit or post .
This provides a great deal of freedom for the horse &apos;s back .
It also offers the least amount of control for the rider .
These positions are rarely used at the trot ; although , both are common at the canter for jumping riders .
Two-point position also requires a good amount of strength in the rider &apos;s legs .
Diagonals A rider posts to one &quot; diagonal &quot; or the other at the trot ; when the rider is on the correct diagonal , the rider sits as the horse &apos;s inside hind leg and outside foreleg are on the ground and rises as the outside hind leg and inside foreleg are on the ground .
Diagonals are used in the posting trot help to keep the horse balanced , and are also useful for timing certain riding aids , such as those for the canter .
A rider can learn to recognize diagonals by feel .
However , less-experienced riders can check for the correct diagonal by a quick glance at the horse &apos;s shoulder , sitting when the outside foreleg is on the ground and the shoulder is back .
Pirouette ( dressage ) A Pirouette is a French word for the Ballet reference , &quot; to whirl about . &quot;
A pirouette is a two-track lateral movement asked of a horse in dressage , in which the animal makes a circle with its front end around a smaller circle made by the hind end .
Specifically , the front legs and outside hind leg should travel around the inside hind leg , with the horse remaining slightly bent in the direction of travel .
From the part of the rider it needs &quot; much practice in collecting and balancing the horse and in using the aids correctly . &quot;
The horse may perform the movement at the walk or canter , although the pirouette at the walk is more commonly called the turn on the haunches .
It &quot; can also be executed at piaffe . &quot;
As in all dressage , the horse should remain relaxed , engaged , and responsive , with the poll as the highest point .
Ideally , the pirouette will be almost in-place , although many horses perform a slightly larger pirouette .
A pirouette may be performed either as a 360-degree turn ( full pirouette ) , 270 degrees ( ¾ -pirouette ) , or 180-degrees ( half-pirouette ) .
Some dressage tests call for two full pirouettes in a row ( 720 degrees ) .
Number of beats and strides The walk stride has to consist of four beats .
Pivoting around one hindleg without lifting it is not considered a correct movement : &quot; The inside hind foot is raised and put down almost in the same place &quot; .
When performed at the canter , the gait actually is meant to remain a three-beat action with a moment of suspension .
However , the high level of collection , strength and discipline required means that it often degenerates into an incorrect four-beat motion .
The correct half-pirouette in canter &quot; should take three steps &quot; or strides , the whole pirouette should take &quot; six to eight &quot; strides .
Faults The canter pirouette is a very difficult exercise when performed correctly .
The horse should not throw his body around , fall inward , or let his hindquarters fall to the outside , but should remain balanced .
The horse should not plant one of his hind legs and move around it — as seen in the western spin — but should lift them up and place them down with each stride , maintaining the purity of the gait .
The horse should not lose the rhythm of the canter , or fall onto his forehand .
The horse should not make an oval-shaped movement with his hindquarters , but should inscribe a perfect circle .
The horse should never step back .
Each bound should be equal .
It must not degenerate into a four-beat motion or lose its moment of suspension .
Easy Canter Pirouettes with Morten Thomsen How to teach your horse the complex canter pirouette from the walk In the summer of 2012 , Beth Baumert visited Sarah and Morten Thomsen in Silkeborg , Denmark .
&quot; Their fantastic brick facility sported natural light and an aviary , and their lovely horses acted like they were special enough to belong there , &quot; she reported .
&quot; The first horse I saw was ridden well , but when I saw him do a canter pirouette , I thought , Wow !
That horse can really canter pirouette .
Then I saw the next horse and he also had a rare talent for canter pirouette .
Then , after the third pirouetting genius , I knew that it was Morten Thomsen who was the genius , so I had to ask him : How do you do that ?
Here &apos;s what he told me : &quot; Trainers often introduce canter pirouettes by spiraling in from a large circle .
It &apos;s a common mistake , in my opinion , because horses started this way don &apos;t really know what you want .
Often the rider starts to kick and pull and the horse doesn &apos;t understand .
The horse gets a lot of pressure but he doesn &apos;t see the purpose .
I begin thinking about training canter pirouettes when my horse can do a walk-canter transition with ease .
At that point , I know he &apos;s ready for a little collection in the canter because he is able to bend his hind legs , lower the quarters and sit .
I first ask for collection on a large circle , and the moment that he sits a little , I walk .
You can feel when the horse sits because his rhythm slows .
This teaches the horse that if he sits , he will get the reward of walking .
As a result , he will try to sit quickly in order to be rewarded .
Of course , the situation can happen that we go on a circle and I feel that I can &apos;t get the horse &apos;s hind legs to bend .
Sometimes horses just thrust themselves forward with the hind legs .
In this situation , it &apos;s impossible for the horse to sit , so I start in walk .
In any case , it &apos;s easiest for the horse to learn and understand the fundamentals of pirouette in walk , and then the basics are the same for canter .
When I can make a large pirouette in walk , my horse will close his frame and sit .
It &apos;s difficult to sit in canter , but in walk , the horse will achieve it from the work you &apos;ve done .
At this point , my horse already knows everything he needs to learn about canter pirouette .
I teach my horse all these things before we start it in canter .
First Master the Walk Pirouette I begin by teaching my horse to do travers , or haunches-in , on a circle .
Then , I ask him to turn in the travers to make a pirouette in walk .
Here &apos;s how I begin : I control my horse &apos;s shoulders with the position of my hands .
If I want the shoulders to move left , I take both hands to the left .
If I want them to go right I take both hands right .
It &apos;s similar to western neck reining .
By making my horse &apos;s shoulders mobile , my goal is to be able to center those shoulders exactly over the inside hind leg , and that inside hind must keep stepping forward rather than going to the side .
In pirouette left , for example , I want my horse to bend left and turn left .
If I want to make the pirouette bigger , I move the shoulders out with my inside ( left ) rein .
Then I turn from the outside ( right ) leg and rein , but mostly the rein .
Remember , you don &apos;t want your horse &apos;s hindquarters to go in , so you won &apos;t use too much leg for that reason .
When I have this control over the shoulders , then I can bend left and control the turning .
So I ride a large walk pirouette like this : 1 .
Maintaining the left bend , I turn him left with the right hand using very little leg .
2 .
As soon as my horse turns in pirouette , I ask him to go out again from the inside leg and rein .
I always want this control of the shoulders , so from the inside rein , I neck rein the shoulders out while keeping the left bend .
3 .
When I confirm that control with the inside rein , I turn again with the outside rein .
I confirm these aids to be sure he responds immediately : He goes out from inside rein and leg and in from mostly the outside rein .
He turns left as soon as I bring my right hand left , and he moves out as soon as I take my left hand to the right .
As you review the pirouette in walk , do it bigger and smaller , quicker and slower .
Those are all the corrections you will need to make later in canter .
You &apos;ll need to sometimes do it larger , sometimes smaller , sometimes quicker and sometimes slower .
When you can make those adjustments in size and speed in the walk , then you will be able to do the same in canter .
When my horse understands the concepts of turning with bend in the walk , he will understand it in canter , too .
Now Train the Canter Pirouette When the walk pirouette is well confirmed , I make it a bit quicker , ? and then even quicker .
I tap him ? with the whip and ask for canter .
I want just one jump of canter pirouette , and the moment my horse does it , I say , &quot; Oh !
Good ! &quot;
and then I walk out of it and give him a break .
Soon my horse knows that if I go into pirouette in walk and I start to make him quicker , he knows I will ask for canter .
Then he knows he will get a break and I will praise him .
As soon as he canters , I stop and praise him .
I want only one jump of canter .
When the horse is confirmed in taking one balanced stride of canter pirouette , I take the next step .
I say to my horse , &quot; I didn &apos;t see the first jump .
Can you give me one more jump ? &quot;
Slowly the horse learns to stay on the spot and take one , two and then three steps of canter pirouette .
Just as you don &apos;t start with 15 one-tempis , or 15 piaffe steps , it &apos;s the same with the pirouette .
I &apos;m happy if I get one stride , then two , then three strides that are balanced .
Remember what he has learned from the walk pirouettes ? that he can make a stride bigger , smaller , quicker or slower .
When you have all those skills , you can do your pirouette from a normal collected canter because the horse understands exactly what ? you want .
Troubleshooting Common Mistakes 1 .
Spinning .
Your horse , at some point , will start to spin , but you have taught your horse to go out from inside rein .
If he starts to turn too fast in the pirouette left , stop and leg yield right keeping the left bend .
If you teach your horse that you can stop him with the inside rein , then you can soon control the pirouette with that inside rein , and you can do as many strides as you want ? two , four , six or eight strides .
2 .
Hind legs together .
When your horse tries to collect too much in the pirouette , he jumps with his hind legs together , without separating them .
He needs to learn to jump forward with the inside hind leg .
Ride travers on the large circle or half pass .
Push your horse over until you feel that he separates his hind legs in the canter .
Then walk .
Try to make it slots smaller again .
If he collects too much again , make the circle larger again and travers .
Then as soon as the hind legs separate , walk .
Make it clear to the horse what you want .
Don &apos;t continue until he makes a mistake .
If you stop when the horse makes a mistake , then you are actually rewarding him for making the mistake even though you don &apos;t mean to .
The horse doesn &apos;t see it that way .
He sees that stopping work is a reward .
3 .
Uneven balance .
If your horse is very good to one side but he loses the canter rhythm to the other side , it &apos;s always because he has one hind leg that supports his weight more easily than the other hind leg .
You can help the horse find the balance in pirouette on the weaker hind leg .
In travers , you put the pressure on the outside hind leg , and in shoulder-in you put the pressure on the inside hind leg .
If your horse &apos;s canter is good to the left but the right is not good , then when you go right , you should start it from shoulder-in instead of travers .
I get the hind leg a little bit out so there &apos;s more pressure on the right hind leg when I do the pirouette right .
Then you can do pirouette left from travers so the right hind leg again takes the pressure .
In this way , you do pirouette with the pressure on whichever hind leg you want .
Sometimes it only takes a few weeks before the horse is comfortable taking the weight on either hind leg , and you can do the pirouette equally to both sides .
You can do the pirouette so there is more pressure on one leg or the other or the same on both .
You can level it out in a way that makes it easier for the horse to turn .
4 .
Stuck .
In the test , sooner or later , it happens that there is a mistake that makes the horse stop .
This can happen in pirouette or in piaffe .
I always teach my horses that they are able to start again .
I don &apos;t want the horse to think , Now I &apos;m stuck and I can &apos;t start again .
When that happens , the rider usually ends up using too much leg .
Teach your horse that he can start easily from just a cluck .
Stop him sometimes and then just start again .
When you can do this , you can relax and the pirouettes get even better .
It &apos;s the same in piaffe .
Psychology of Equine Learning Remember that any time you want to teach your horse a new concept , he will try a lot of responses , and many of them will be wrong .
But if you punish him or tell him he &apos;s wrong every time he gives you the wrong response , he will stop trying ? that &apos;s trouble .
The right answer will never come and I can never reward .
You need your horse to try .
The more he tries , the sooner he will get the right answer and then you can reward him .
Think of this while you teach the pirouettes or any new concept .
As long as my horse doesn &apos;t know the right thing for sure , he can make as many mistakes as he wants .
If he definitely knows exactly what you &apos;re asking for , and you &apos;re sure the mistake is not on you , then you can correct your horse , but you have to be sure that the mistake is not yours and the horse is not misunderstanding you .
A lot of mistakes happen because the horse is misunderstanding the rider , and it &apos;s our responsibility to be clear .
Understand Your Center of Dynamics in the Saddle Susanne von Dietze critiques Katherine Shelton at Introductory Level .
This picture is of Katherine Shelton and her senior draft-cross gelding that she rescued .
Katherine is an amateur rider and is photographed here at her first schooling show at Introductory Level .
The angle of this picture shows the size of both horse and rider and it shows some harmony between them , too .
They look focused on their test and are clearly demonstrating what they have achieved together .
Riding is one of the few sports where you can see a variety of body types performing well .
I can imagine how much it meant for Katherine to rescue this horse , train together and head out to show !
For this I give her a lot of credit .
While the saddle looks like it fits the horse well , it does look small on Katherine .
Her compromise is to make it best for the horse first .
The horse looks in good condition and seems to work happy and content in a nice frame and contact .
Katherine is sitting balanced and quiet and appears to ride with the highest concentration .
Her leg position shows some outside rotation , which might be due to the shape of her leg .
Riders with short and round thighs might have a very hard time staying supple in their hips when rotating the leg further in .
I notice that she is slightly looking down and sitting a tiny bit forward as if to sit lighter on her horse .
This might also be because she is perhaps in the sitting moment of the rising trot .
When analyzing riders ’ balance , I often compare two different shapes of upper body .
When I look at a rider from behind , some look like a “ V ” with a narrow pelvis and broad shoulder , others look more like an “ A ” with narrow shoulders and a broad pelvis .
Katherine belongs to the second group .
In terms of balance , it is important to understand what that means .
It is a challenge to balance a V shape .
In contrast , the A-shaped body has a much more secure balance , and that often makes horses feel more secure .
When the balance is steady , even the weight of a plus-size rider is less disturbing than the weight of a rider who is unbalanced and insecure .
Now imagine how the horse will feel a shift of weight .
A V-shaped rider will have to move only a tiny bit to the side and the horse will feel the change .
But an A-shaped rider will have to move much more to have the same effect and influence on the horse .
In my studies of physiotherapy , I learned to pay special attention to the body ’ s diagonals .
If you draw a diagonal line between shoulders and hips , these diagonals resemble our diagonally structured muscles , and all our movements are organized in sync with these body diagonals .
If you look at photographs from all different sports you can see many of those diagonal movements .
When drawing these diagonals into a body , they cross at a very important point .
I call it the dynamic center of the body .
This center is not equivalent to the gravitational center of the body .
Applying this to the A- and V-shape riders shows : What does that mean for riding ?
To be able to use correct seat and weight aids and influence the horse , the two centers need to connect and work together .
For Katherine it means that if she moves only her upper body , she moves her dynamic area but there will be no shift of weight that the horse can feel .
Only when she actively connects the muscles from her upper body with her pelvis can she influence the horse .
A V-shaped rider may move much more in the pelvis and midsection of the body and be unable to give precise aids ( because of instability in the midsection ) until she learns to connect the higher gravity center with the movement below .
The image that Katherine needs to keep in mind is to ride thinking that she wants to stretch up from her pelvis , connect her gravity center with the dynamic center and broaden her shoulders as much as possible .
Then she can get her messages across to the horse with more lightness and suppleness .
This may allow her to open her hip joints easier and improve her leg position .
I wish Katherine and her horse enjoyment in future rides together .
Understanding the pros and cons of functional anatomy will help .
Then the riding can become a healthy sport for both of them !
Improve Shoulder Position by Creating Positive Tension Biomechanics expert Susanne von Dietze critiques Lone Rytter on her 9-year-old mare .
This picture shows Lone Rytter from Denmark riding her 9-year-old mare , who has limited miles under saddle .
Lone herself has started riding again after a 15-year break .
Lone reports that she does have some problems with her shoulders and knows that she tends to look down .
She says that the mare can get a bit tense going to shows , but Lone is positive that this will get better with some more experience , as they have competed together only four times .
At first glace , I notice that this horse is elegant and free-moving and she sure has some presence and beauty within her movement .
Good activity from behind and a nice natural uphill movement add to the good impression .
Lone ’ s seat has a nice correct outline .
I like her long leg position .
It is hard to judge from this angle , but I do get the impression that she is sitting carefully and appears to be hovering a bit above the horse .
I would like her to be more deep and connected through her seat .
This could be the reason why her heel is slightly up even though her leg appears long .
Or maybe this picture was taken when Lone was in rising trot in the moment just before she sat down again .
From my teaching experience , I do know that riders who restart riding after a long break have not forgotten how to ride ( it ’ s like riding a bicycle ) .
However , they do have more difficulty in finding a deep and connected seat and they ride somewhat mechanically until their body regains core stability and elasticity .
Lone comments on her shoulder problems , which are most likely connected to the fact that she needs to create more positive tension within her upper body .
In the picture , her shoulders are very slightly rounded and her challenge will be to correct her shoulder position without stiffening up and losing the forward elasticity in her hands .
During her warm-up , she should try this : Deliberately move different parts of your body because playing between areas of stability and areas of mobility trains body awareness and coordination .
You can turn your head rhythmically in rising trot , looking to the inside , straight ahead and to the outside .
While turning your head , you should make sure that your hands stay parallel and forward , rather than follow toward the side you turn .
Next , keep your head quiet and move your shoulders , alternating up and down , circling forward and backward like rowing or swimming .
Again , your hands should stay as quiet as possible when you move your shoulder blades .
These exercises help release tension in the body and give you a feel for controlling your arm movement from your core .
With better mobility in her shoulders , Lone can start building up more stability , too .
To combine core stability with correct breathing while gaining a better shoulder position , Lone can try the following exercise : Sit on your horse at the walk .
As you breathe in , allow your shoulders to rise slightly up toward your ears .
As you breathe out , slowly push your shoulders down but stretch your spine up longer .
This lengthening of your spine while breathing out slowly builds up positive tension along your back .
It is important that you keep reaching down with your seat bones , deepening your seat to avoid tension in your buttocks .
To help riders feel better stability around their shoulder girdle , it can be helpful to imagine that the rein does not just run from the horse ’ s mouth to the rider ’ s hand , but that the arm is actually part of the rein , and forms a circle that starts from the bit and runs up the reins and rider ’ s arms and connects between the shoulder blades .
Imagining that there is a copy of the bit hanging between your shoulder blades on your back can give you a better feel for this connection .
Another picture I think is helpful : Instead of taking your shoulders back , which often creates tension , imagine moving your shoulder blades in the shape of a big heart on your back .
Move your shoulder blades slightly up , widen them and then bring them down and more together .
And as you connect your shoulders , your hands should push forward in contrast .
This will help Lone be able to give her hand a better forward tendency while staying more connected with her body at the same time .
I hope that these tips and images can be helpful for her so that she and her beautiful mare can enjoy performing together in the show ring .
How to Organize , Plan and Structure Your Ride By following the three-part ride structure — warm-up , work sets and cool-down — we ensure the horse works in optimal physical comfort and emotional health .
Our responsibility as riders is to keep the horse happy and healthy in his work .
One of the best ways to do this is to keep the horse comfortable in his body during our rides .
When the work feels good to him , he may even offer to do more .
By following the three-part ride structure — warm-up , work sets and cool-down — we ensure the horse works in optimal physical comfort and emotional health .
Without thoughtful planning , you may experience some avoidable problems .
For example , if the horse isn ’ t warmed up properly , then the work can be painful for him or cause injury .
If work sets aren ’ t planned , then riders may repeat the same movement too many times or too many days in a row and cause repetitive-motion injuries or unintentionally demoralize the horse .
If the horse isn ’ t cooled down and stretched out properly at the end of a ride , then a pattern of tightness is established that makes each day ’ s work a chore .
Follow these guidelines to plan your rides each day / week to ultimately achieve your riding goals with a happy , healthy mount .
Ride Structure 101 The basic structure of a training ride for every horse should always be the same : warm-up , work sets and cool-down .
There is much room for variation within each of the three phases for each individual horse .
The amount of time you spend in each phase and the goal of each phase will also vary from day to day .
Warm-Up A correct warm-up prepares the horse ’ s joints and muscles for the demands of the work sets .
The initial 10 minutes of a ride should be an active walk on long reins .
As the horse walks , the joint fluid circulates and lubricates the joints .
Then the rider should establish a basic connection and ride five to 10 minutes of working trot and canter on 20-meter circles , straight lines , bending lines and changes of direction .
This pumps oxygenated blood throughout the horse ’ s muscles so that the muscle fibers become warm and pliable .
During the end of this phase , the horse may be ready for more suppling work , such as leg yields and 15-meter circles .
By the end of the warm-up the horse should be confirmed in the first three steps of the Training Scale — he should demonstrate rhythmic gaits , feel supple in his body and achieve the connection required for the work ahead .
Note that certain types of horses require you to spend more time in the warm-up phase .
For example , horses who are older , stiffer or have had time off take longer to achieve suppleness .
Take the time you need .
Especially if the horse is coming back from an injury — patiently warm up until the joints , ligaments , tendons and muscles are supple .
Then the horse has the optimal chance to come back to work with no further injury .
The warm-up varies from horse to horse .
Some horses loosen up better in the canter while others work better in trot early on .
Some horses may need more bending lines to control the tempo while others need more straight lines to get the engine revving .
Some horses may take up to 30 minutes to feel warmed up while others may be ready to work after 15 minutes .
Each rider needs to figure out the best warm-up routine for her individual horse , but the result should be the same : The horse and rider achieve the bottom three rungs of the Training Scale .
Work Sessions Once the horse is properly warmed up , the rider should have a clear plan for what to work on that day .
She should ride approximately two or three sets of work with walk breaks in between each set .
Build your work sets in a systematic way to set the horse up for success .
I like to vary the work sets according to muscle groups .
For example , if I worked on canter – walk – canter transitions during one session , then the next session I ’ ll focus on exercises that are less weight-bearing , such as lateral work at the trot .
This routine keeps the horse physically comfortable and mentally engaged .
Variety in work .
The goal of your work will vary from day to day .
I plan my rides depending on the day of the week .
For instance , my horses work Monday through Friday with the weekends off .
When I begin on Monday , I do what I call “ gaits day . ” After a slow warm-up , the work phase is focused on the basic gaits with many transitions between and within the gaits .
This gives the horse a chance to limber up through his whole musculature system .
The horse becomes more tuned to my aids so he is prepared for more serious work sets the next day .
Typically , I ’ ll school the horse more intensely on Tuesday and Wednesday .
These days , the work sets include movements that the horse and I are developing .
I hack on Thursday to give the horse ’ s tendons , ligaments and muscles a chance to recuperate plus give him a mental break from the ring .
I school him again on Friday , revisiting the training that I addressed on Tuesday and Wednesday .
The weekly work schedule varies from horse to horse .
A lazier horse might do better with two days of working outside of the ring to keep him fresh and increase fitness .
A horse who has contact issues may benefit from long-lining or longeing during the week .
A horse who requires fitness can benefit from cavaletti work .
Some horses benefit most from anaerobic work , such as walk lateral work , while others flourish with more aerobic canter work .
Develop a plan of progressive work to systematically help each individual horse move forward with his training .
Cool Out After the work sets , you enter the cool-down session of the ride .
The rider should stretch her horse in the walk , trot and / or canter .
A horse who is still developing strength might do better with a short-duration stretch in the trot so his balance isn ’ t thrown onto the forehand .
For this horse , more time is spent stretching in the free walk .
A fully mature horse can benefit from a longer period of stretch in the trot and canter .
Make sure that connection is always maintained in the stretch , which means the horse ’ s abdominals are still engaged and the back muscles are lifted .
The stretching frame allows the muscles that have been contracted in the work sets to lengthen and dispel the lactic acid that has built up during the session .
Finally , the horse should walk on a long rein for five to 10 minutes or until his muscles return to a comfortable resting body temperature .
A correct cool-down allows the horse to finish the ride in the optimal physical and mental state to begin work the next day .
This is important every day .
Often , your 45-minute lesson or clinic does not include the cool-down portion of a ride .
The cool-down is the rider ’ s responsibility .
Remember to cool down after your class at a horse show as well .
Be thoughtful and organize your ride .
You will find a system to adhere to that is in the best physical and emotional interest of the horse and will help you reach your training goals .
How Can I Improve My Balance in Posting Trot ?
Getting the correct balance and mechanics for a good posting trot can take some time and effort .
Q : I was told that when posting the trot , I bump into my horse ’ s back when sitting down , yet I ’ m not aware of it .
Leaning slightly forward doesn ’ t seem to solve the problem .
Do you have any suggestions on how I can post the trot without falling into my horse ’ s back ?
— Name withheld by request A : You are not alone .
Getting the correct balance and mechanics for a good posting trot can take some time and effort .
The longer you have been posting bumping into your horse ’ s back , the more you will need to consciously retrain your mind and body to recognize the correct balance .
The first place to start will be to look at your saddle fit and balance .
When the saddle is on your horse ’ s back , the lowest place of the seat should be centered .
Often the saddle has the lowest part of the seat in the back half of the saddle .
When the saddle is out of balance like that , it is hard for any rider to post easily .
Have your instructor stand next to you in your saddle at a halt .
With you sitting in the center of the saddle , your body should be in vertical alignment with your shoulders over your hips and your hips over your heels .
If your feet are in front of the vertical line , it is quite difficult to control your balance while posting .
If it looks like your saddle may be a little low in back , try putting a folded towel under the cantle to raise the back .
Then try posting .
If this makes posting easier , you might need to have your saddle adjusted or reflocked .
Once your saddle is in correct balance , there are several mounted exercises to help you gain control of your posting .
1 .
Go into a half-seat position while at the walk .
To do this , put more weight into your stirrups and heels , keeping your knees soft , and take your seat slightly out of the saddle .
Walk , holding this position , using mane or a neck strap to help you balance .
Concentrate on keeping your balance as the horse moves .
Your body stretches down ( from below the waist ) and up ( from above the waist ) at the same time , much like the balance a tennis player has when serving a ball .
You should work up to being able to hold this position around the arena .
2 .
Practice posting at the walk .
This will help you engage your core to help lift and stabilize your upper body because at the walk there is no push up from the horse ’ s impulsion .
Take this exercise to the next level by posting at the walk with your hands on your hips .
3 .
Get your instructor or a friend to longe you on a reliable horse .
At the trot , practice posting with your hands on your hips , then with your hands on your shoulders and then with your hands on your head .
Alternate these arm positions while you stay in posting trot .
Repeat these simple exercises daily until you have confirmed the correct balance and independent seat for posting .
In addition to these exercises , it is helpful to have some mental images to help you find this balance and have an engaged core during your ride .
Here are some mental images to help you find your self-carriage : 1 .
Stay out of the hole .
Imagine that the center of the saddle is a hole rather than a platform and you want to touch down but not allow yourself to fall in .
2 .
Post quietly .
If you hear your seat hitting the saddle at each down beat , you are falling down .
Engage your core and balance yourself to touch down quietly .
3 .
Imagine a string attached to the top of your helmet , lifting you up .
4 .
Find a phrase or image that helps you stay engaged and balanced and say it to yourself often .
Off the horse , strengthening your core will help with your physical ability to carry yourself while you ride .
You have many choices , such as Pilates and yoga , to enhance core fitness .
However , even a few simple exercises at home or in the barn , when done regularly and correctly , will make a significant improvement .
“ The plank exercise is an easy way to develop your core strength and stability .
Maybe you can have a barn challenge , adding a minute a week to the time that everyone can hold the plank , ” says Debbie Rodriguez .
( © Jacob Lund - stock.adobe.com ) “ The plank exercise is an easy way to develop your core strength and stability .
Maybe you can have a barn challenge , adding a minute a week to the time that everyone can hold the plank , ” says Debbie Rodriguez .
( © Jacob Lund - stock.adobe.com ) The plank exercise is an easy way to develop your core strength and stability .
Start out on the floor on your forearms and feet .
Have your body and hips in alignment between your shoulders and heels .
Challenge yourself to hold this position for a minute at first and work up to several minutes .
If the full plank is difficult at first , modify the exercise by going to your knees , keeping your shoulders , hips and knees in alignment .
Maybe you can have a barn challenge , adding a minute a week to the time that everyone can hold the plank .
Look at YouTube , where you can find many variations of plank exercises , which can keep this exercise fresh and challenging .
Once you have the correct balance with your saddle , the correct mechanics of the post , a good mental image and a strong , stable core , you will be acing the posting trot .
2a debbie rodriguez courtesy Focus on the Spine to Correct Shoulder Position Biomechanics expert Susanne von Dietze critiques Alexandria Belton at Second Level .
This picture shows Alexandria Belton competing her 17-year-old American Paint gelding , Daffy ’ s Son Shine ( “ Coqui ” ) .
Alexandria writes that she is successfully competing at Second Level and is schooling Third Level at home with the goal of earning her scores for her USDF bronze medal .
According to Alexandria , Coqui had only been ridden in reining , cattle work , jumping and Western pleasure until he was 10 years old .
Then she introduced him to dressage and now they ’ re working their way up through the levels .
This is a good example how the classical , correct riding system allows horses of all types and ages to be worked correctly and stay healthy and athletic in their movement .
In her note , Alexandria very accurately describes that it is now difficult to work on further collection and more lightness of the shoulders as her horse is , by nature , bred and built more downhill .
She also reports that for her , too , it is hard to keep her shoulders back and that she has the habit of looking down .
I often notice that there are similarities between horse and rider .
So it does not surprise me that Coqui and Alexandria are both showing this weak spot around their shoulders .
Alexandria correctly describes this challenge and asks for help in addressing it .
Helping a horse to become lighter in the forehand needs a lot of support and stability of the rider ’ s upper body .
When looking at the picture , I notice that Alexandria is riding with a nice long leg position and it seems to be only up between her shoulders that she rounds .
She looks down a bit and , as a result , her arms are not carried enough forward .
Sometimes one can build up support and strength in the back by slightly rounding the shoulders and keeping the upper arms and elbows a bit to the outside .
This creates some stretch over the back and shoulder area and that can help for a better connection with the horse .
However , this rounding creates fake stability and will only work in the short term .
When such a rider tries to correct the round shoulder position and pulls her shoulders back and down , she often becomes unstable in the core and lacks feel for her horse ’ s needs and then the picture becomes more stiff than stable .
Instead of focusing on bringing her shoulders back , I would advise Alexandria to concentrate more on the movement of her spine .
Try this : Sit on a chair and feel your collarbones all the way from your sternum to the sides of your shoulders .
Then you should feel down the vertebrae of your neck and feel the one bone sticking out of the back of the neck the farthest .
This is the lowest cervical segment , called C7 .
To mobilize your upper thoracic spine , you should imagine a movement of rounding your spine by letting the collarbones move down while the C7 vertebra pushes up .
Then arch your upper spine by lifting your collarbones up as C7 moves down .
This can be a very tiny movement , but it has great influence on your head and shoulder position and your influence of the horse .
Often when we attempt to sit up straight , we only lift our chins and , by that , we shorten the back of our necks , which is not healthy .
Then we become stiff in the shoulders by holding them back , which means we are unable to keep a soft , giving and elastic contact with the horse ’ s mouth .
Instead of straightening in the upper part of the spine , we move the lower ribs forward and we lean back .
This stiffens the lower back and prevents us from following the horse ’ s movement smoothly .
The exercise I described teaches a different approach to straightening up in the body and connects the rider more with the seat , leaving her shoulders free and independent .
Instead of forcing the shoulders back , the chest moves forward up between the shoulders and this allows more suppleness combined with a more stable core .
I describe this in detail because this will become the key for Alexandria to bring Coqui into a higher level of collection .
Playing between a tiny curl and arch movement will open new refined levels of communication between her and her mount .
Once she gets this feeling , her habit of looking down will fade out of her riding automatically .
I wish Alexandria and Coqui luck and success on their way up to Third Level !
Finding the Ideal Free Walk Understand what constitutes a correct free walk and learn how you can help your horse produce a better free walk .
One of the most important focuses as a trainer and instructor is making sure riders actually “ ride ” the walk .
I believe if your butt is in the saddle , you are training your horse , whether you are taking a walk break , schooling movements or going on a trail ride .
You and your horse can use the initial walk of your ride , the breaks and the cool down to relax .
But if you allow the horse to walk poorly — with a lack of energy , an incorrect rhythm , hollowness or without stretching toward the bit — how does he know you want a good free walk in your dressage test ?
Carl Hester and Nip Tuck demonstrate a world-class walk .
Riding a correct walk — even during breaks or trail rides — will help you maintain consistency in your training and help the horse build strength .
( Arnd Bronkhorst - arnd.nl ) Carl Hester and Nip Tuck demonstrate a world-class walk .
Riding a correct walk — even during breaks or trail rides — will help you maintain consistency in your training and help the horse build strength .
( Arnd Bronkhorst - arnd.nl ) The Free Walk An ideal free walk is four clear beats , has good energy , overtracks ( when the hind hoof surpasses the print made by the front hoof ) and the horse ’ s neck reaches forward and downward with a round , long topline .
Horses need plenty of free walk breaks during training to let their muscles relax .
Consistency is the most important quality in the training so the standard must not change when you take a walk break .
If the free walk has the following elements , your horse will feel good when you shorten the reins and go back to work .
During the walk break , ask yourself : • Is my horse in front of my leg ?
• Is he reaching for the contact ?
• Is he using his back properly ?
If not , when you go back to work , your horse might be behind the leg , disconnected and feel tight , hollow or stiff in the back .
The rider cannot be upset with the horse because she allowed these traits during the break .
Besides consistency in the training , riding a good free walk is effective strength-building .
Think of the difference for yourself if you do a power walk .
You are striding down the road with good posture , with your eyes up and your arms swinging .
Compare that to strolling along , dragging your feet with your head down .
Which one is better for your body ?
For a horse who needs to improve fitness , the walk is the most important thing to focus on .
Riding a super free walk — especially if you can do it out of the arena and up and down hills — builds muscle without putting a lot of strain on joints and soft tissue .
Riding the Walk This energetic walk will move the rider ’ s body a fair amount .
When a horse marches in the free walk with a lot of energy , overtrack and stretch , he must use his back and neck a lot .
The rider must follow to stay with that movement .
“ Moving with the walk ” means your whole body follows the movement of the horse ’ s whole body .
When I talk specifically about “ following , ” I am referring to the rider ’ s shoulders , elbows , forearms and hands .
Most people are aware that their hips must move with the horse so they don ’ t stiffen and therefore tighten the horse ’ s back .
The hips must follow the exact movement of the horse ’ s back .
The leg must follow the horse ’ s rib cage precisely .
However , often I find people have been told to have quiet hands , and they think that means having hands that are still .
In the walk , especially a good quality walk , the horse must oscillate his neck forward and back .
If the rider doesn ’ t follow this oscillation , then the horse will not feel free to use his topline .
Proper following in the walk will teach the horse that he can use his neck and increases the amount he uses his back .
He should be able to walk through his whole body .
Conversely , a rider who does not follow with the walk makes the horse hold his head and neck still , therefore holding and tightening his back , making the walk smaller or sometimes even compromising the four-beat rhythm of the walk .
In the walk , the rider ’ s hands should go forward as the horse ’ s ears go forward and down , but only as much as the horse requires to maintain a steady contact .
The hands will come back to a neutral position as the horse ’ s ears come back and up .
This is opposite of the way the rider ’ s hips move .
The motion is like a rowing machine .
The hands go forward as the hips go back then the hands come back as the hips go forward .
The rider ’ s pelvis must follow the motion of the horse , but I always urge people not to force this motion .
Riders should not push or drive with the seat bones in the walk .
If you try to push and shove with the seat to make a bigger walk , the horse usually drops his back and slows down .
Instead , focus on following with the arms , and the pelvis will usually move enough .
As soon as the rider stops following , the pelvis usually stiffens .
Find Your Free Walk First , make sure you are following the walk .
Ask someone to walk along with the horse while you close your eyes .
Imagine the way it felt to ride a horse for the first time .
I ask the student to totally relax and let her body feel like a wet noodle .
Many people will automatically follow quite nicely with the arms the first few times they ever sit on a horse because they haven ’ t been told to “ sit still . ” Exaggerate how much you follow .
Think of an old-time washboard with your thumbs on top or a rowing machine and move your arms .
Then tone it down slightly .
Often , people think they are following much more than they are .
A common mistake is a free walk with too little energy .
I ask people to give the horse all the rein ( assuming it is safe to do so ) and ask for more walk until they find how much walk the horse can give .
This might mean he breaks to the trot for a couple steps .
No problem !
Quietly bring the horse back to walk through the voice and seat and then ask him to walk forward again .
I use leg , voice and maybe the whip if needed to create more walk .
Again , do not pump and push with the seat bones .
The more energy the horse has in walk , the more he will be willing to stretch .
The more he stretches , the bigger you can get the walk .
When the rider can stay connected to the horse ’ s mouth this way , with an elastic contact , he is then ready to use that contact to influence his horse .
Just as a young horse must learn to simply accept contact before he learns to yield to it , a rider must first learn to simply find the contact at all times before she can affect the horse through the contact .
If the rider learns to ride with hands that correctly follow the horse , the horse will become more sensitive to her requests .
For example , a horse who expects a following hand will be very sensitive to the moment when the hand stops following to give a half halt that shifts the horse ’ s balance .
One of the most basic half halts is to go from free walk on a long rein to a medium walk , where we ask the horse to close the frame and come a bit more onto the haunches in preparation for a transition .
This transition from free walk to medium walk is a hard one for many horses — they either anticipate an upcoming transition to trot or canter and get tight in the back or they lose energy and get stiff through the topline .
As the rider shortens the reins for medium walk , the driving leg is ready to ask the horse to keep the energy and march he had in the free walk .
Then the core of the rider engages and the hands close around the reins to rebalance the horse or shift the weight slightly to the hindquarters .
This is a moment when the rider ’ s hand does not follow because we are telling the horse to shorten himself from back to front and stay more uphill , rather than allowing him to lean down and forward into the contact .
Once the half halt goes through the horse ’ s body and he responds by shifting his balance , the rider once again follows in an elastic way with this new , more uphill connection .
Practice riding transitions from free walk to medium walk and back to free walk .
This seems like it should be such an easy thing to do , but it isn ’ t !
And if the rider can go from passively following to gently affecting the horse ’ s balance , the horse will be ready for a good transition to trot or canter and listening closely to his rider .
Are There Different Versions of Turn on the Forehand ?
Kamila Dupont answers this reader question .
Q : I have noticed some riders ride different versions of turn on the forehand .
Some ride it with a lot of bend , others with no bend .
Some ask the horse to describe a large circle with his forehand , others remain on the spot .
Does it have a different effect ?
Which version is most beneficial ?
— Name withheld by request Courtesy , Kamila Dupont Courtesy , Kamila Dupont A : This is a wonderful question for me as I use the turn on the forehand a lot .
I think what you are observing are variations of the exercise more than different versions .
Turns on the forehand are basically lateral movements .
We teach them because they promote suppleness and obedience .
A certain degree of obedience and submission is necessary to perform this exercise .
A larger circle of the front feet and more bend throughout the body are easier than a smaller circle and less bend throughout the body with the front feet staying more on the spot .
The smaller diameter of the forehand turn with less bend requires that the horse has learned how to stay in a frame and , that he is reliably obedient to the driving aids and submissive to the rein aids .
He has learned to respond to a complex combination of aids .
He can : 1 .
Go forward and move his front legs and shoulders up and down pretty much on the spot .
While doing this maneuver on his forehand , he can … 2 .
Obey the rider ’ s inside rein and upper leg so that he is bending his spine around the inside thigh and , at the same time , he can … 3 .
Obey the rider ’ s lower inside leg , which tells the hind legs to cross , and he can also ... 4 .
Obey the rider ’ s outside rein , which will limit the degree of bend in his body .
We are talking about collection here .
I would offer that the smaller turn on the forehand is being done by a horse who is more advanced in his training .
Since progress can be measured by the degree of collection a horse is capable of , the turn on the forehand is a good indicator of where the horse is in his education .
Training the turn on the forehand helps horses understand the bending and the straightening aids .
I find it the crucible of their dressage education .
A more advanced horse will exemplify the concepts of the training scale : a clear walk rhythm , relaxation , a supple connection to the outside rein and a willingness to be straightened .
Referring to the easier variation of the turn on the forehand , in which the front legs describe a larger circle and the horse is allowed some bend to the inside , that horse could be at an earlier stage of his education .
Very soon in his career , a dressage horse will have to perform movements on two tracks , or lateral movements .
Crossing the front and back legs can be confusing to the horse .
I teach lateral exercises in the walk so the horse learns the response to the aids without losing his balance .
All trainers have a system they have developed that asks the horse to obey simple aids : the leg aids , which mean “ go , ” and the rein aids , which mean “ stop ” or “ turn . ” Eventually , it is necessary to combine these aids in a way that produces a more complex crossing of the legs and bending of the body .
Once the horse is comfortable with the driving and turning aids in trot and canter , I start asking for the turn on the forehand in the walk .
I ride a 10-meter circle and ask the hind legs to cross to the outside .
In the beginning , I hold the horse ’ s head to the inside with the inside rein .
I use the whip gently on the flank to get the hindquarters to move away from pressure .
I combine that with a cluck of my tongue , and soon the horse will move away from a very light pressure on his side .
In the early stages , I don ’ t care how much the horse bends his neck because I want him to concentrate on obedience to the leg aid .
Once he obeys the leg aid consistently , I start to add the outside rein to limit the degree of bend throughout the whole length of the body .
When the horse can comfortably move around my inside leg , I start to ask for even more straightness laterally .
That creates more crossing of the hind legs and therefore has a greater suppling effect on the loin muscles .
When the straightness becomes too difficult , I relax the outside rein a bit .
When teaching the turn on the forehand , I do it continually until the horse finds his balance and is confident in the exercise .
Gradually , I reduce the diameter of the circle so that the front legs stay more on the spot and I limit the degree of bend .
When the horse accepts making the circle smaller , he has started to understand a lot more about accepting the aids , which will produce collection .
As with everything new , patient repetition is the key .
Of course , you have to do the exercise on both sides , and one side will always be better than the other .
When a horse can be adjusted from a big circle to a smaller one , I feel an important plateau has been reached .
The horse and I have reached a higher level of cooperation and respect .
Dressage Solutions : Prevent Your Horse ’ s Shoulders from Falling In or Out Imagine that the shoulders are a balancing scale .
When one side ( or shoulder ) is weighted more heavily , the horse will lean in that direction .
To prevent this , try to balance the scales .
— Corinne Foxley Corinne Foxley has been assistant trainer to Felicitas von Neumann-Cosel at Maryland ’ s First Choice Farm for more than seven years .
She also spent time with Uta Gräf in Germany and has earned her USDF bronze medal .
Foxley teaches a classical but creative and systematic approach to help the rider ’ s position and the horse ’ s self-carriage .
Uncover the Mystery of “ On the Bit ” A horse who is on the bit trusts the rider ’ s aids and accepts the contact with the bit.When ridden , horses can truly forget their instinctive behavior to fight or flee .
One element that makes this possible is teaching the horse to accept the aids so he can be ridden on the bit .
The Aids and Contact The rider must be in a balanced , secure and vertical position with independent aids before she can ask the horse to be on the bit .
The seat and leg should be the rider ’ s dominant aids .
The rider has the most weight and strength in these aids and the horse hears them best .
However , the hands are the invitational aids .
You should feel that you allow your hands to play more of an orchestrating role than a dominating role .
In other words , the horse first responds to the leg and is energetic and moving through the back so he wants to stretch to the contact , then the rein can invite him to the contact correctly .
The contact is as unique to every horse and rider as a handshake .
I have noticed a huge variation in the way people shake hands in terms of the strength of grip and the feel .
The rider must offer the horse a friendly , inviting contact so the horse wants to go to it and stay there .
For correct contact , the rider must offer the reins and give the horse a nice feeling to look for .
Sometimes the reins are too tight or too stiff , sometimes they are too loose or unsteady .
The rider must make the rein come alive with energy from her body toward the horse ’ s mouth .
Otherwise , the contact can be a limiting factor in whether the horse can be on the bit .
A common problem with the rein aids is that they can become backward .
Sometimes , the rider doesn ’ t understand how to keep the elastic contact with the reins and incorrectly brings her hands backward to influence the horse .
Sometimes the reins get too long and the hands come back to feel the horse ’ s mouth .
Sometimes , the rider isn ’ t balanced enough in her seat so she pulls back to balance on the reins .
In any case , the horse cannot be invited onto the bit with backward contact because it prevents the energy in the connection from moving from back to front .
On the Bit A horse who is on the bit trusts the rider ’ s aids and accepts the contact with the bit .
He does not lean and pull on the bit nor does he hide from it ; he seeks it .
The horse reaches for the contact with the poll as the highest point and the front of his face on or in front of the vertical .
To see the position of the head and neck , you may want to ride in an arena with mirrors or be videotaped .
You can always see what the horse ’ s head looks like from the top but that is often not enough information until you have fine-tuned your feel .
To the rider , when the horse is on the bit you feel like you are sitting on a wave that flows forward under your seat and through the contact to the bit then is recycled back through the horse ’ s body in a continuous and fluid cycle .
I feel the horse is balanced between my seat , legs and hands , accepts the influence of my aids both laterally and longitudinally and accepts the contact in an elastic way with relaxation and trust .
It is a magical experience once you feel it and know it .
In the horse ’ s mind , when he ’ s on the bit , he accepts your directions and focuses on you no matter what is going on around him .
A round and through horse — when the rider ’ s aids can pass through the horse without restriction from back to front and front to back — forgets his instinctive nature to raise his head and instead focuses on the rider .
Putting the horse correctly on the bit develops a partnership with him .
He gives you that feeling that he wants to work with you and wants to be ridden .
He can give you his mind and body , which is emotionally fulfilling and a requirement to developing harmony .
Some riders perceive that the horse should be overcontrolled in front .
This results in a short neck and the horse ’ s face behind the vertical .
The problem sometimes results from a misunderstanding of the contact or fear of a strong horse , but a horse being ridden too tightly or overflexed in front can also suffer some possible neck damage and back issues .
The position limits the horse ’ s ability to use his back and neck correctly and therefore be through .
To be on the bit , the horse must accept the connection .
The following exercise helps achieve this as you connect your horse from your inside leg to your outside rein .
To be on the bit , the horse must accept the connection .
This exercise — a leg yield in the walk on a 20-meter circle starting at A — helps achieve this as you connect your horse from your inside leg to your outside rein .
To be on the bit , the horse must accept the connection .
This exercise — a leg yield in the walk on a 20-meter circle starting at A — helps achieve this as you connect your horse from your inside leg to your outside rein .
Try this : Ride a leg yield in the walk on a 20-meter circle starting at A.
Track left at the medium walk from A around the first quarter of the circle .
As you leave the long-side wall , ask the horse to leg yield from the left leg along the line of the circle so the front legs stay on the circle line and the hind legs are pushed to the right with the inside legs crossing slightly over the outside legs .
Keep your weight centered , bring your left leg slightly back to initiate the leg yield while the left rein asks only for slight flexion left and the right rein controls the shoulder to keep the horse ’ s body straight and create the leg yield .
As you return to the wall , allow the horse to follow the bend of the circle line to A for the last quarter of the circle .
The exercise should be done in both directions and at the medium walk and working trot .
The leg yield on the circle connects the horse from the inside leg to the outside rein to put him on the bit .
You can monitor the connection by answering these five questions : 1 .
Can you maintain the rhythm and tempo of the gait during the exercise ?
2 .
Does the horse have a stiffer side or is he supple in both directions ?
3 .
Does the horse accept the leg aid ?
4 .
Does he accept the rein aids ?
5 .
Do you have shoulder control ?
If these requirements are met and the rider has an elastic quality in her contact , she is likely to keep the horse truly connected in both directions .
Polish Your Dressage Freestyle Terry Ciotti Gallo answers this reader question and provides some tips to improve your dressage Freestyle .
Q : I have been riding my own First Level Freestyle and observing at the higher levels .
I notice that some rides are polished and others are not .
Can you tell me some general ways I can polish my ride ?
Also , I am wondering what happens if my music stops during my test .
Do I start over ?
A : When rider first began doing Freestyles , they were not able to see the connection between the music and the movements .
But now , most people are aware that the beat of the music must match the footfall of the horse .
This is good because , at the trot , the judge will be looking for the front legs to match the beat of the music as they strike the ground .
At the canter , the lead leg must be in-sync with the beat .
I think the newest challenge facing freestyle riders is in remembering to present an entire program .
Riders are linking disparate pieces of music together .
Yes , the pieces match the footfalls and change when the gaits change , but the selections don ’ t have a cohesive sound .
The various selections must be linked either by coming from the same genre ( jazz , classical , show tunes ) , having a theme ( children ’ s music , Irish music , Broadway ) or at least having the same instrumentation ( all orchestral , all small band , guitar as a feature instrument ) .
That ’ s what holds the program together .
Another way to give added impact to your program is to interpret your music .
For instance , when you hear the phrasing change within a piece , think about how you can express that change with your horse ’ s movement .
The most critical issue involved in giving your freestyle a true polish , though , is the editing of your music .
This is crucial because your composition shouldn ’ t sound as if you dashed it together the night before .
Ask yourself if the editing is disruptive or if there are long pauses between sections .
If so , then the editing needs to be tighter .
Just as you expect your transitions from gait to gait or from movement to movement to be fluid , you must expect the transitions in your music to be clean and smooth .
Seek the help of a professional editor .
Not only will your musical transitions be good , but the sound will be clean and crisp , too .
Then , when you come down centerline , you can have confidence that you will have good sound quality .
Having well-recorded music is even more important because the sound systems at shows are often poor .
In fact , I recently went to a CDI-W , where the music just stopped in the middle of someone ’ s ride .
That poor rider spent a lot of time to get that far , and this problem certainly was unexpected .
If this technical glitch happens to you , Article 1928 , 6.4 of the American Horse Shows Association ( AHSA ) Rule Book says , “ In case of technical failure of the playing of the music , the competitor has the option to continue the ride without penalty or to stop and ride the test again .
Teaching Travers with Belinda Nairn-Wertman This Olympian shows how to develop your horse ’ s suppleness , collection and strength with haunches-in .
Travers is a fancy name for a very down-to-earth movement , haunches-in , which is just that : As the horse travels in a straight line with his front legs , he bends his body to the inside , bringing his haunches in off the track .
Viewed from in front or behind , he travels on three or four separate tracks , with his hind legs moving forward and sideways in a crossover fashion .
The outside hind leg , which appears to cross in front of the inside hind leg , provides much of the driving power for the movement and takes on more of the horse ’ s weight by stepping increasingly sideways and under his body .
Introduced at Second Level , the travers is a good exercise for developing suppleness and collection , for correcting straightness problems and for tuning the horse to the rider ’ s aids .
Because it requires the horse to bend in his body and work much harder with his outside hind leg , this exercise will strengthen his topline , back and hindquarters and encourage him to shift his weight backward , thus achieving more collection .
The travers also teaches the horse and rider two new concepts that will be invaluable in their later work , particularly in canter pirouettes and the half pass .
The first is that , unlike in the leg yield where the horse is bent slightly away from the direction he ’ s traveling , in haunches-in , he bends toward the direction he ’ s traveling .
For instance , if he ’ s doing haunches-in to the left , with his haunches coming off the track to the left , his body bends to the left .
This also is the first time the rider uses her outside leg as an active aid .
Rather than supporting the bend in a passive way , the outside leg initiates the haunches-in movement , actively cueing the horse to move his hindquarters to the inside .
Basic Skills Needed Before attempting the travers , you and your horse need to have acquired certain basic skills .
He needs to be through : moving forward , round and accepting your aids .
He must be competent in the leg yield and shoulder-in and demonstrate some respect for your outside aids .
To test this , trot a circle and ask him to leg yield toward the inside of the circle , moving off your outside leg and hand .
You , too , need to be clear on the concept of riding forward .
Impulsion is a key aspect in performing a good travers .
You also need to have achieved enough independence in your leg , seat and hands that you can use each aid individually .
In other words , you don ’ t want to accidentally use conflicting aids at the same time and risk confusing your horse or throwing him off balance .
Your own balance in the saddle is extremely important in travers .
If you have trouble staying “ with ” him , it ’ s easy to interfere with his ability to perform the exercise .
It ’ s also helpful to have some knowledge and feel for the timing of the horse ’ s foot-falls so that you can time your own aids more effectively .
Getting Started For young and / or inexperienced horses , travers is most difficult to learn at the walk , because it ’ s so easy to lose impulsion .
I prefer to teach it at the trot or , because it ’ s sometimes even easier for horses to learn it in the canter , I occasionally start with that .
Some horses , particularly tense thoroughbred types , figure that movement out faster at the canter .
Riders also often find timing the aids easier with the slower canter rhythm .
The simplest way to teach haunches-in is with a 10- to 12-meter circle in the corner of the arena .
As you complete the circle , you ’ ll maintain the forward pace .
As your horse reaches the straightaway , you ’ ll apply a little more outside leg to prevent his haunches from reaching the track and continue the haunches-in down the long side of the arena .
On the circle , you ’ ll establish the bend of your horse and the basic position of your body that you ’ ll use in travers .
When you leave the circle to begin the travers down the long side , you ’ ll have an easier time holding your horse ’ s hindquarters to the inside by using the already established bend from the circle .
Be sure to establish a good bend on the circle , using your inside leg at the girth and your outside leg behind the girth .
Then increase the bend slightly by bringing your horse ’ s nose to the inside rein until you can see his nose just inside his shoulder .
Prevent his outside shoulder from falling out by maintaining a steady contact with your outside rein and keeping your inside leg active .
Over time , you ’ ll want your connection to your horse to shift from being primarily inside rein / outside leg to being primarily outside rein / inside leg .
As you start to move down the long side , try to time your outside leg aid so that you squeeze as your horse ’ s outside hind leg comes off the ground , thus encouraging it to cross over more .
Otherwise , continue using the same bending aids ( supple inside rein , steady outside rein and active inside leg ) you had on the circle , adding a little extra inside leg pressure if he loses impulsion .
His head and shoulders will remain on a straight line on the track .
Meanwhile , keep your head and upper body straight and facing forward , focusing your eyes down the length of the straightaway .
Allow your inside hip to come forward slightly to match the forward angle of your horse ’ s inside hip , still feeling that your upper-body weight is in the center of your horse .
Upper-level riders incorporate a small weight shift to the inside hip in their cues for travers , however , this easily can be overdone .
Less-experienced riders create many problems by focusing too much on this weight shift .
At the early stages of learning , you need to think of sitting squarely in the saddle , without leaning or trying consciously to weight one hip more than the other .
Concentrate on quietly following your horse ’ s motion rather than pushing it with your seat .
Although your horse ’ s front and hind legs are doing two different things , you must ride him with a strong feeling of connection .
You need to feel a symmetrical bending through his body around your inside leg as well as an increase in power generated by his outside hind leg .
This power must translate all the way through his body so he moves in one smooth , coordinated unit .
To create this feeling , you need to coordinate and connect your own aids .
Rather than thinking of riding his front end and hind end separately , think of using your legs , seat and hands in unison to ride him forward into the contact , connecting him from front to back and maintaining the bend throughout his body .
You need to maintain the tempo and impulsion of the trot ( or canter ) throughout the movement .
With an inexperienced horse , you may have to slow the gait down slightly to allow him to find his own lateral balance initially , but don ’ t slow him down so much that you forfeit the quality of the gait .
At first , only expect three to six good steps of haunches-in .
As he starts to lose the bend or crossover , straighten him back out on the track and praise him .
Try the exercise again with another circle in the corner at the other end of the arena .
Don ’ t overdo it , though .
Young horses learn best if you make it fun for them , if they ’ re not fatigued and if you keep their minds fresh .
Don ’ t expect everything to be perfect at once , either .
During one attempt , for instance , try focusing on maintaining a good bend , not worrying too much about how much crossover you ’ re getting .
Then later , do the opposite , focusing on the crossover and not worrying quite so much about the bend .
As he grows stronger , you can correct a haunches-in that ’ s not quite right by going back to a 10-meter circle , wherever you happen to be on the long side , reestablishing the bend and forward rhythm and then trying the haunches-in again as you come out of the circle .
As with all new movements , it ’ s best to ask for just a little at first and to praise you horse for even the smallest effort .
As he begins to understand the concept and grows stronger in his hind-end , you gradually can ask for more steps , more bend and more collection .
And , as he begins to understand the concept at the trot , if that ’ s the gait you started him in , try the travers at the canter as well , using the same technique .
Eventually , with patience and consistency , you will be able to maintain a correct travers down most of the length of the long side in every gait .
The Aids Dorie Addy-Crow , who has worked for me for nearly eight years , and Gambol , a 6-year-old approved Dutch stallion by Gabor and owned by George and Diane Fellows , demonstrate the outside and inside aids for travers .
Inside aids ( below ) : Dorie &apos;s inside leg is active at the girth to help reinforce the bend , and she holds a supple inside rein .
Her inside hip comes slightly forward to match the forward angle of Gambol &apos;s inside hip .
travers 1 Outside aids ( below ) : Dorie &apos;s outside leg is behind the girth , and she holds a steady outside rein to keep Gambol &apos;s outside shoulder from falling out .
travers 2 Teaching Travers 1 .
As my student , Ashley Fornell and her 8-year-old imported Dutch gelding , Kerido , by Burggraf , finish the circle and reach the straightaway to the long side , she applies more outside ( left ) leg to prevent his haunches from reaching the track .
teaching travers 1 2 .
Ashley times her outside leg aid so she squeezes as Kerido &apos;s outside leg comes off the ground , encouraging it to cross over more .
She uses a supple inside ( right ) rein , steady outside rein and active inside leg .
teaching travers 2 3 .
When Kerido started to lose the bend , Ashley straightened him and praised him .
Next , she &apos;ll try the exercise with another circle in the corner at the other end of the arena .
teaching travers 3 travers shoulder exercise Troubleshooting A big mistake that riders often make when first attempting travers is simply trying too hard .
By leaning or twisting their upper bodies or exaggerating their hip movement , they try to help the horse move sideways .
But , instead of helping the horse , this actually interferes with him by either blocking the direction of his movement or throwing him off balance .
To prevent this from happening , concentrate on keeping your seat in the middle of the saddle , not trying to push him sideways with any exaggerated movements .
Riders also often overdo leg pressure .
Thinking they have to work harder to maintain the greater bend in the movement , they squeeze and squeeze their legs until they ’ re exhausted after only about five minutes .
You need to reinforce the bending in travers with an active inside leg , but you shouldn ’ t need to squeeze so much that your leg tires .
Below , Ashley is demonstrating a travers that is losing the bend .
This can happen when the horse is not properly on the aids .
To correct this , circle immediately and re-establish the bend and repeat the haunches-in as you come out of the circle .
troubleshooting travers 1 Below , Dorie is demonstrating a travers with too much bend , which can happen when you overuse the inside rein and outside leg without supporting the bend properly with the inside leg and outside rein .
To correct this , maintain contact with the outside rein and keep the inside rein active .
troubleshooting travers 2 Some other common horse-and-rider mistakes include : 1 .
Rider holds too much rein contact .
Inexperienced riders have a tendency to feel that they need to hold more rein contact to create the sideways movement and to help the horse maintain his bend and collection .
This habit sometimes is a result of an unsteady rider trying to hold herself in the saddle .
Unfortunately , it causes the horse to lose his impulsion and thus destroys the movement .
Correction : Both you and your horse have to learn to balance yourselves independently in lateral work , while still maintaining impulsion .
So concentrate on your own balance and don ’ t try to “ hold up ” your horse .
The less you interfere with him , the faster he ’ ll master his own balance .
Work on improving the independence of your seat ( by riding without stirrups , etc . )
and be sure to maintain the same trot in haunches-in that you had on the straightaway and circle .
2 .
Rider uses too much inside rein .
Though the cues for travers include the inside rein and outside leg , if you overdo these aids without supporting the bend properly with the inside leg and outside rein , you ’ ll throw the horse ’ s balance onto his outside shoulder .
Correction : Always maintain contact with the outside rein and keep your inside leg active .
This outside rein / inside leg connection is your eventual goal in all of your work .
3 .
Horse not properly on the aids .
Traveling with a hollow back and not accepting the aids , the horse cannot properly bend his body and step under it with his outside hind leg .
Correction : Check his bend on the circle and exaggerate it slightly before beginning the haunches-in .
Be sure to maintain a steady contact with your outside rein to support the bend .
If he loses the bend during the movement , circle immediately , wherever you are on the long side , reestablish the bend , and then repeat the haunches-in again as you come out of the circle .
4 .
Not enough crossover .
Horses that are stiff or lazy behind tend to volunteer less crossover in the haunches-in .
The good news is , the movement itself will strengthen these horses and improve their hind-end activity with practice .
Correction : Be sure to start the movement with a very active trot and maintain that activity throughout the movement .
When he becomes sluggish , make a circle as I described in number three above to reactivate his hind end before going back to the movement .
I reserve the spur or whip to intensify a movement , rather than relying on them to create the movement .
So , if you horse is becoming less responsive to your outside leg , instead of using stronger spurs or whip , try this exercise : If you ’ re traveling to the right in travers , immediately turn the movement into a leg-yielding exercise , asking him to move off your old outside / new inside ( left ) leg and rein .
Either do this on the straightaway or make a 20-meter circle , leg yielding toward the center of the circle off your left leg .
Exaggerate the bending , which is now to the left a little bit .
This will put him a little off balance and cause him to move away from your left aids , thus reminding him to associate those aids with a sideways movement .
This will help sharpen his response to your aids in travers well .
5 .
Not enough bend .
This can result in too much crossover and an immediate loss of impulsion .
If a horse doesn ’ t have enough bend in his body , he ’ ll be stiff in his back and spine and will move sideways with both his front and hind legs , essentially performing a leg yield rather than a haunches-in .
Correction : To correct this , you ’ ll need to improve both the bend and the impulsion .
Go back to your circle and reestablish both before attempting the movement again .
When you try the movement , focus more on his bend and impulsion than his degree of crossover .
By following this methodical system for teaching your horse to do travers confidently , you ’ ll give yourself an invaluable tool to increase his suppleness and straightness , as well as prepare him for upper-level work .
Create More Jump in the Canter Cindy Sydnor critiques this horse and rider .
This is an elegant pair .
Horse and rider are well turned out .
Although glove color is not specified by the AHSA , I wish the rider would not show in black gloves .
White gloves are more traditionally correct and would enhance this picture .
The rider has a lovely position and should be proud of her correct rein position .
The horse is calm , round and balanced in the canter and seems to be paying excellent attention to his rider , who also is paying excellent attention to her horse .
However , there are things that could make this picture even better .
There is not going to be much of a moment of suspension in this canter .
It needs more jump .
The horse is not jumping enough to lift himself off the ground after the landing of the right fore .
I can see this because the right hind has not landed far enough under the horse ’ s body , and the left hind toe is still in the sand .
If he were jumping better , the right hind would have landed closer to the line drawn through the rider ’ s body : ear , shoulder , hip , heel , instead of 12 to 14 inches behind her heel .
In the very moment pictured here , the rider should try to activate the hind quarters of her horse , inspiring him to jump more under himself in the next stride , and then the next , until he understands that she wants him to be more active behind .
He is trying to please her .
That is obvious from his willing , attentive expression , and he probably assumes that this flat canter is what she wants .
Although she should not get angry with him , she should make it clear that she wants more jump in the canter she should explain this through seat and lower leg pressure , reinforced with a light touch of the whip behind her leg .
The canter pictured , although harmonious and smooth looking , would not have sufficient impulsion and engagement to do upper-level movements such as half pass or pirouettes in the collected canter .
Lower-level training should prepare the horse for upper-level collection .
This means that in the lower levels , the rider should develop the gaits to produce the engagement and strength the horse will need to perform the upper-level work .
This rider ’ s excellent seat will provide her with the ability to get more out of the basics with her horse .
The Secret to Free , Forward Collection Beth Baumert explains why this kind of collection is the natural result of forward half halts and forward downward transitions When a horse carries his rider forward in brilliant collection with no apparent effort , he ’ s proud , happy and free .
The secret to that special quality of collection is simple : Free , forward collection is the natural result of forward half halts and forward downward transitions .
It ’ s simple in theory and not difficult in practice , but the rider needs to be persistent and open to thinking in a counterintuitive way .
Here ’ s how : Normally , when riders think of downward transitions and half halts , they think of coming back from something more to something less .
They might go from a lengthened stride and half halt back to a working trot .
They might do downward transitions from canter ( 12 mph ) to trot ( 8 mph ) or from trot to walk ( 4 mph ) .
The frequent scenario is that the rider thinks of coming back to walk from trot .
She puts the brakes on with aids that say , “ Stop trotting . ” Then , with another combination of aids , the rider says , “ Walk . ” Those half halts work in a rudimentary way , but they tell the horse what not to do rather than what to do .
Forward half halts tell your horse what to do .
Can you , instead of thinking of coming back to the lesser gait , think of going forward to it ?
Let ’ s try , for example , a transition from trot to walk .
The Trot – Walk Transition Here ’ s how to do that transition in a forward way : 1 .
Ask for smaller trot strides with a smaller seat aid .
2 .
At the same time , half halt in a forward way : Close your fingers and push with your legs into your fixed hand .
That will have the effect of retaining or even increasing the energy , closing the horse from back to front and lifting the forehand .
Your hands say , “ Cover less ground , ” and because your horse ’ s strides are smaller , they will be higher and more active — or more collected !
3 .
Finally , as the trot strides get smaller , your miles per hour will decrease until you ’ re trotting at 4 mph , the speed of walk .
At this point your horse will ask you if you want him to walk .
Say “ Yes . ” Or , alternatively , you can go back into an 8-mph trot .
Does this sound like collection ?
Yes .
You can dance your way between trot and walk or between canter and trot .
Note that the half halt in walk and canter is slightly different from the half halt in trot .
There is a forward moment of the walk and canter strides in which the horse reaches with his head and neck .
The rider ’ s arms normally accommodate in order to follow the horse ’ s mouth .
In the restraining moment of the half halt , the rider ’ s hands should stop following and the rider pushes with her seat and legs into her fixed hand .
In the trot , because there is no natural movement of the head and neck , the rider ’ s hands are relatively steady so the rider closes her fingers to half halt .
It ’ s important that the rider ’ s hands are soft to begin with or the horse won ’ t feel the rein aid .
A peek into the future : When your horse can easily trot with activity and rhythm at 4 mph , he ’ ll be stronger .
He might then be able to trot actively and rhythmically at 3 mph and then 2 and 1 .
And then you have half steps and piaffe , which are a natural extension of the training in forward half halts and forward-thinking downward transitions .
Forward half halts develop the horse in a way that he feels just as free and unrestricted when he goes from working trot to walk as he is from working trot to lengthened trot .
He ’ s just as free when he goes from walk to piaffe as he is in an upward transition from walk to trot .
Energy Flow If you haven ’ t had the opportunity to see extremely good dressage riding , go online and look at videos from the recent FEI World Cup ™ Dressage Final in Omaha or other comparable footage of great riders .
You can see there is a flow — an actual flow of energy from back to front .
Energy always cycles in the horse from the hind legs forward through the body and neck to the bit where it is recycled back to the hind legs .
Molly O ’ Brien demonstrates this on Telurico , owned by Pierre Pirard .
( Beth Baumert ) Energy always cycles in the horse from the hind legs forward through the body and neck to the bit where it is recycled back to the hind legs .
Molly O ’ Brien demonstrates this on Telurico , owned by Pierre Pirard .
( Beth Baumert ) If energy had a color , you could see it always cycling through the horse in a circle from the hind legs , forward through the body and neck , all the way to the bit , where it is then recycled back to the hind legs seamlessly with invisible half halts .
This energy always moves from back to front .
The rider is part of that circle of energy , which flows forward from her center through her elbows to the bit and recycles back to her seat .
Be sure that your personal energy is going in the same direction — toward the bit — even in half halts .
Downward transitions and half halts that are done in a forward way are part of that circle of energy .
The aids ride on the circle of energy , and the horse bounces from bigger strides to smaller strides in the same way that he bounces from smaller strides to bigger strides .
Very Common Problems Sometimes riders use too much rein aid and forget the leg and seat aids .
When half halts are ridden backward in this way , the circle of energy is broken and the horse ’ s throughness is lost .
Backward half halts cause physical tightness in the horse ’ s back , neck and jaw , which shuts down the hindquarters .
Mentally , the horse feels restricted .
The rein aid should always be combined with and should be less than the seat and leg aids .
The seat and leg drive the hindquarters into the fixed ( not pulling ) hand .
These aids should bring the hind legs under the horse toward his center of gravity so he closes the frame from behind , putting him in better balance .
The half halt reduces ground coverage without stopping the circle of energy or curtailing the horse ’ s reach for the bit .
He remains relaxed yet responsive in the body and does not feel restricted during the half halt .
If the rider is out of balance , she cannot ride from back to front .
The most common problem is the rider who leans back and doesn ’ t go with the forward motion of the horse during the half halt .
Thrust from the horse sometimes puts the rider behind the motion .
That ’ s just physics at work .
Then the rider restricts the horse by sitting against the rein with her shoulders instead of her seat .
If the rider ’ s leg goes too far forward , then it is not supporting her weight and it is out of position to help the horse engage .
When the rider ’ s upper body is behind the vertical , the direction of force from her seat and back drive the horse ’ s shoulders downhill , making engagement and throughness impossible .
Try this : 1 .
Sit in vertical balance with your head over your shoulders , hips and heels during every phase of the half halt .
The rider must remain in balance for the horse to achieve balance .
2 .
Touch the withers with both hands .
This is a form of release that will make your horse comfortable .
Why ?
First , it assures that you aren ’ t providing a fifth leg to help carry your horse .
Many riders aren ’ t aware that they ’ re providing more support than they ideally should .
If your horse lowers his neck during this release , it means that you ’ ve unwittingly been carrying it .
That small release allows self-carriage , and the neck will go to whatever height it is earning relative to the engagement of the hind legs .
Second , it assures that the energy is going from back to front .
If it ’ s hard to touch the withers , it means that the energy has been going from front to back .
If it is hard for you to release , it is because you ’ ve been balancing against the flow .
Many people have this problem and the simple test of briefly touching the withers will help resolve it .
3 .
Ride a transition from working trot to medium walk .
From a steady trot tempo , half halt several times in the rhythm of trot until the strides get shorter but the energy is still coming back to front .
When the trot is shortened so that the horse is going the same miles per hour as at the walk , ask for walk .
The transition will be smooth .
If the horse learns this way , he will use himself correctly and he ’ ll understand how to go forward into collection as you move up the levels .
If , as you shorten the strides , your horse shuts down behind or even stops as if you ’ re going to get off and go shopping , persist .
He might be used to snoozing in the walk .
You might not get those smooth transitions right away .
Try again and again to help your horse understand .
Keep the goals of the forward half halt in mind as you ride your horse at any level .
Your horse will develop the strength for collection while remaining happy to work for you because of the enhanced throughness , free of mental or physical constriction .
When you get to the upper levels , the half halt for higher collection needed for piaffe or pirouette will not be a new skill but a well-honed part of your horse ’ s repertoire — and yours , too !
Connect Your Horse in Shoulder-Fore How to use upward and downward transitions with half-halts in shoulder-fore .
If you were successful with Exercise 1 , &quot; Get Your Horse &apos;s Pushing Engine in Gear &quot; ( Read it here ) , you got your horse ’ s pushing engine in gear and were able to steer without reins .
This next exercise helps you connect your horse ’ s engines by doing upward and downward transitions with half-halts in shoulder-fore .
Step 1 : Shorten the stride and put your horse on the aids .
Half-halt to rebalance him from behind into a shorter frame .
This shorter frame invites you to shorten your reins .
Channel your horse in the shape of shoulder-fore : The inside hind steps into the space between the two front legs .
Keep the outside hind in alignment with the outside fore .
Ride straight toward a mirror if possible so you can monitor your horse ’ s shape .
This is difficult , so be quietly persistent .
Step 2 : Do forward-and-back transitions in the walk .
Go from a free walk on the diagonal , back to a medium walk before the corner and through the short side and the next corner .
Then do a free walk on the diagonal again .
These transitions show your horse exactly how to respond .
Ride from inside leg to outside rein in shoulder-fore , which balances him on the outside rein and helps him relax .
Step 3 : Do shoulder-fore in trot and in canter .
Shoulder-fore is difficult but persist quietly .
When you ’ re successful , your horse will give it to you more readily , because he likes to be balanced too !
Hilda Gurney : Begin Developing Piaffe How half steps start the process of teaching a horse to piaffe .
Many horses find piaffe one of the biggest obstacles on the road to Grand Prix .
Piaffe , the trot in place ( with a clear diagonal rhythm ) , differs from all other dressage movements in that the horse carries more weight with his hind legs ( maintaining a fairly strong hock flexion ) while providing the upward thrust with his forelegs .
In all other dressage movements , with the possible exception of the canter pirouette , the horse carries more weight with his forelegs while using his hind legs for propulsion .
The ability of a horse to perform a high-quality piaffe is somewhat innate as a result of genetics .
However , poor training can easily impair the horse ’ s ability to piaffe .
Good training is absolutely necessary to develop every horse &apos;s potential to piaffe .
There are many methods of teaching piaffe .
Most horses respond best to a combination of these methods .
It ’ s best to introduce piaffe to a horse fairly early in his training .
But it ’ s a common mistake to show piaffe before he is ready , causing him to become tense when asked to show piaffe in a test .
Often months , and even years , are necessary before a horse clearly understands the rider ’ s aids for piaffe or becomes strong enough physically to execute piaffe without undue stress .
When I work with a young horse , I first need to make a decision about whether this horse will be asked to compete at the Grand Prix level .
If the answer is “ yes , ” I know that I must plan to schedule an extra 20 minutes about three times a week for piaffe schooling .
I usually teach piaffe before passage , although I rarely turn down passage if a horse offers it on his own in a situation where he can be controlled .
On the occasion that a horse offers passage , I will reinforce it with my aids along with a special cluck that I use only when I want passage .
Only rarely have I had horses offer piaffe in a controlled situation , although I taught my Olympic horse , Keen , to piaffe by having my mother ride ahead of me on her horse down the trail , heading toward home .
Keen was a really hot horse and would get so upset if another horse was ahead of him ( he was a Thoroughbred , after all ) that he would piaffe if I restrained him a bit .
After a while , I was able to use my aids to indicate piaffe , although he never piaffed as relaxed as I would have liked .
I ’ m not saying that this was the best way to teach piaffe , but it worked for Keen .
Begin with Walk – Halt Depending on the horse ’ s ability to balance and engage , I usually try to start schooling small , piaffe-like half steps around 5 years of age .
Unmounted in-hand work may be started earlier with horses that are already able to shorten their strides .
This in-hand schooling progresses in several steps : 1 .
I introduce work in-hand by having a person stand at the horse ’ s shoulder , facing backward while holding the horse with a lead line and a whip 4. to 5 feet in length .
I like to use side reins on the horse at first to help keep his neck and shoulders straight .
2 .
I begin by simply asking the horse to walk forward a few steps followed by a halt .
A cluck signals the horse to walk and a “ whoa ” — along with a check on the lead line , if needed — to halt .
From time to time , I give the horse an easily chewed treat when he halts .
I walk backward , holding the lead with my hand and staying next to his shoulder .
I hold the whip in the other hand .
It is important to stay near the horse ’ s shoulder for safety reasons in case he gets upset and tries to strike or kick .
Some large horses work best with two people — one at the head , holding the lead , and the other nearer the hind end , working with the whip .
3 .
I quietly school the walk – halt for five to 10 minutes the first day as well as in following schooling sessions until he stays next to the rail , walking quietly straight ahead and allowing me to control his forward speed .
He also needs to halt straight and square when I say “ whoa . ” Treats are appropriate whenever he halts straight and square .
Trot – Halt – Trot When the halt – walk exercise is well performed , I begin to ask the horse for a few steps of shortened trot .
Short taps of the whip just behind the stifle on his haunches , along with a cluck , indicate that he should trot .
( Remember that horses respond differently to the feel of the whip on the body so you have to experiment to find the place that gets the response you want . )
I should still be able to walk backward while the horse executes the shortened trot steps .
Only a few trot steps need to be performed before I ask the horse to halt .
Then I praise him .
Short training sessions schooling trot – halt – trot help him improve his reactions to the cluck , the whip tap and the “ whoa . ” Gradually , the horse ’ s balance and straightness will improve .
If a horse finds it difficult to perform a trot short enough to allow you to walk with him , he may not yet be ready for work in-hand and may profit from work on half steps under saddle to enable them to shorten his trot enough to work in-hand .
Pick Up Each Hind Leg When the horse is confident performing the trot – halt – trot exercise on the rail and stands well at the halt , I teach him to pick up his hind legs one at a time .
I use a fairly stiff whip for this purpose .
Alternate picking up the hind legs , left – right – left , just as he would in the piaffe .
It ’ s important that no pain is associated with tapping the horse ’ s legs .
Any pain associated with schooling piaffe may result in the horse tightening his muscles and even cringing .
Horses that associate piaffe with pain rarely perform a loose , supple piaffe .
I tap one hind leg lightly on the front of his cannon bone until the horse unweights it .
When he picks it up off the ground , I immediately praise him .
I don ’ t care how he picks up the leg at first .
I just want his hock flexed as he lifts the hoof off the ground .
I ignore any kicking .
It doesn ’ t matter at this stage of training if it happens .
I tap the other hind leg on the front of the cannon bone as I cluck , rewarding the horse when he picks it up .
Short periods of regular practice picking up the hind legs will result in the horse alternating picking up his hind legs with just a cluck or by pointing at them with the whip using the lightest of taps .
Practice Half Steps When the horse understands picking up his hind legs with a light signal from the whip , I cluck and point toward his hind legs as I ask for the trot from the halt .
The ideal result is a few very short , active steps of trot with active hind legs and only slight movement forward .
I ask for only a very short step before lavishing the horse with reward .
I practice these very short steps until he responds readily when asked .
I ask for only 10 to 20 steps .
A horse is never asked to perform more than 15 piaffe steps in dressage tests .
Asking too much of him only makes the lessons more difficult .
It ’ s better to ask for less , keeping the work less demanding .
Tips for success .
Asking the horse to round his loin and engage his haunches is the next training goal .
Usually tapping him on or behind his haunches causes him to tuck them under himself .
I might also tap him on his croup to ask him to undulate his pelvis .
Remember that it takes constant analysis and adjustment of the aids to keep the horse in the right position to perform a correct piaffe .
He should always be allowed to move slightly forward in his half steps to maintain active lift and bending of his forelegs .
I need to take care not to ask for so much engagement that his hind legs go so far under him that he is unable to flex them properly .
Overengaging the hind legs may also result in a horse bringing his forelegs backward under his body to balance himself as if he were standing on a pedestal .
If the horse begins to sit too much , I return to touching his hind legs to pick them up one at a time .
This will cause him to adjust his balance , returning to a correctly balanced position .
Maintaining a round topline is also important , although usually when the horse works in-hand and wears side reins , he remains nicely round .
Not having to carry the weight of the rider makes the piaffe work much easier for the horse , which is one of the benefits of in-hand work .
Straightness and regularity are important aspects of schooling piaffe .
It may be necessary to shorten the outside side rein to prevent the horse from becoming crooked by falling out on that shoulder .
Sometimes during this work , horses will lift one hind leg higher than the other or bring one leg farther forward .
Switching directions as necessary when working the horse in-hand usually solves these problems .
Gradually , the horse can be asked for shorter steps , although even in Grand Prix competition , moving a hoof ’ s breath forward is allowed .
If the horse begins to lose activity , it ’ s a good correction to trot him a few steps forward ( but it ’ s challenging to run backward alongside him ) .
If the horse wants to go too forward , it helps to alternate a few steps back and then go forward again into the half steps .
Finally , when the horse performs a reliable , correct piaffe in-hand , a rider can be added .
At first , the rider just sits on the horse while the handler continues the work in-hand .
This is our topic for next month .
Thanks to Laura Romfh for outfitting Hilda and Kim for this article from her collection at English Riding Supply ( romfh.com ) .
How to Ride and Utilize Shoulder-In with Ernst Hoyos Learn about this classical straightening exercise that produces throughness .
In the 18th century , the French riding master François Robichon de La Guérinière was looking for an exercise that created more shoulder freedom in the horse , enabling him to move laterally in an easier and more beautiful way .
As a result , he invented the shoulder-in , which has become one of the most fundamental exercises in the training of a dressage horse .
It is not only a requirement in dressage tests but also the building stone for all other lateral movements , from the turn on the haunches , ( at walk ) to travers ( at trot and canter ) to the canter pirouette .
The rider who is able to ride his horse in a correct and controlled shoulder-in will later find all other lateral movements easy .
Every horse has some natural crookedness , which the rider must diminish in his training .
Horses tend to fall in with their haunches when moving on a straight line because the hindquarters are wider than the shoulders .
The systematic training under saddle is to improve this natural “ left- or right-handedness ” in order to have a supple horse on both hands .
The horse must be made straight and step with both hind legs in exactly the same direction as the front legs .
As a consequence , the legs are being burdened evenly as opposed to evading sideways .
Many riders forget that the horse has four legs since , from their position in the saddle , they only see the forehand .
Suppleness and elasticity in the haunches , however , are fundamental qualities in a well-trained dressage horse .
The forward-sideways moving in the shoulder-in helps the rider improve the horse ’ s lateral bend and activate the haunches to develop more carrying power .
Now it becomes easier for the rider to control the horse ’ s “ engine . ” The Aids for Shoulder-In In shoulder-in , the horse is bent around the rider ’ s inside leg at about a 30-degree angle , moving forward on three tracks .
The hindquarters remain on the first track , while the rider guides the forehand toward the inside of the arena so that the horse ’ s inside hind leg moves in the direction of the outside front leg .
The outside hind leg is on the first track , the inside hind leg and outside front leg are on the second track and the inside front leg moves on the third track .
Ideally , in the shoulder-in , the rider gives the horse security through his own inner balance .
This causes the horse to concentrate more on the rider than on his natural instincts .
It is crucial that the rider guides the horse with the outside rein and determines the degree of flexion with the inside rein .
At the same time , the rider increases the weight on his inside seat bone , drives the horse forward / sideways with his inside leg at the girth and maintains the haunches with his outside leg behind the girth ( this is called a guarding outside leg . )
When working on the shoulder-in , it is highly important to distinguish between a horse with “ square ” conformation and a horse with “ rectangular ” conformation ( see photos ) .
The square horse requires more lateral bend in the shoulder-in to be able to execute it correctly on three tracks .
One has achieved the correct amount of bend when the horse can see his inside hind leg with his inside eye .
In this ideal case , the horse is bent like a banana .
When working with a rectangular horse , one easily ends up on four tracks instead of three if one allows too much lateral bend .
The rider should only be able to see the inner half of the horse ’ s face .
Generally , riders do better with rectangular horses because we tend to make square horses too short in their necks .
The square horse ’ s body is already so compact that he easily gets too short in his neck when sitting more on his haunches , such as when riding shoulder-in .
When and How to Begin In dressage tests , the shoulder-in is introduced at Second Level .
When schooling , I recommend using it also at First Level because the throughness it creates in the horse also improves his straightness .
Shoulder-in improves the articulation of the joints in the haunches , improves the shoulder freedom and makes the horse more supple .
Furthermore , it consolidates a horse ’ s balance , and he becomes more obedient .
Personally , I teach the shoulder-in to very young horses .
It helps them develop better balance earlier on , and they are better gymnasticized .
The increased sense of security this gives them also makes them mentally stronger .
“ You can ’ t teach an old dog new tricks ” is a motto I like to apply when it comes to essential exercises , such as the shoulder-in .
However , I recommend that an inexperienced rider not start the shoulder-in before the horse is at the end of his fourth year to prevent taking away too much rhythm and impulsion from the horse .
If you start too early , the hindquarters tend to be left out behind instead of stepping more under .
A shoulder-in is not necessarily a correct shoulder-in .
It all depends on the quality of the execution .
1 .
Voltes : These small circles are the foundation for developing the shoulder-in .
The horse must have learned to move on bent lines in correct lateral bend and take up more weight with his inner hind leg .
He must step into the outside rein and respond to half halts and full halts .
The rider must sit in balance , his shoulders parallel to the horse ’ s shoulders .
If all of this is in place , one can begin with the shoulder-fore .
2 .
Shoulder-fore : I start by setting my horse up for a change through the diagonal after the corner of the short side of the arena .
However , instead of allowing my horse to actually change through the diagonal , I continue to ride down the long side with this same amount of bend .
This way I achieve a shoulder-fore , a preliminary exercise to the shoulder-in .
The goal is to align the horse ’ s legs with the hind legs , which gives the horse a slight flexion and bend .
While his inner hind leg steps between his front legs , his outside hind leg must remain on the track of the equilateral front leg .
Because the horse ’ s hind legs now step closer together , this preliminary exercise encourages him to increase the weight bearing on the hind legs .
3 .
Shoulder-in : If the rider now slowly increases flexion and bend , the shoulder-fore turns into a shoulder-in .
It ’ s crucial that the rider first guides the horse ’ s head , then his shoulders , then his midsection and , only then , the hindquarters .
To really live up to the horse , the rider must mentally divide the execution of the shoulder-in into these four sections .
Furthermore , being two-legged creatures , we need to understand the situation of a four-legged creature .
In the beginning , choose a slow tempo that gives the horse the chance to find the right balance .
Here the rider must always pay attention to the evenness of the rhythm .
Once the shoulder-in has been confirmed , start working on impulsion .
Practice the shoulder-in in short intervals , changing frequently between moving laterally and straight ahead .
To complete the shoulder-in , lead the horse ’ s forehand back to the track again with your outside rein and inside leg .
I recommend practicing shoulder-in on the second and third tracks in order to become more independent from the wall .
Common Problems While there is only one correct way to execute a shoulder-in , there are a variety of mistakes , which most of the time are caused by the rider , who must be able to help the horse with his body , not impede him .
As with all exercises , the rider needs to be mentally and physically at least three steps ahead of the horse .
Only then can the pair achieve harmony and , through the rider ’ s invisible aids , dressage becomes beautiful to the observer .
In order to achieve this goal , the rider must recognize mistakes in advance before they actually happen .
The horse escapes over his outside shoulder when the rider fails to guide him with the outside rein .
For the majority of riders , the inside rein dominates .
This way , the problem starts already on normal bent lines and multiplies as the degree of difficulty in a movement increases .
So the inside hand is only responsible for flexing and suppling the poll .
A good rider is able to yield with the inside hand at any given moment without losing the contact , since the rider guides and steers the horse with the outside hand .
Many riders collapse their hips , shifting their weight to the outside .
The weight , however , must be on the inside seat bone .
One can test this by simply stepping into the inside stirrup .
Only the rider who truly weights his inside seat bone is able to shift his weight onto the inside stirrup and step into it .
Constantly check your aids to make sure they ’ re correct .
If the horse still escapes over his outside shoulder , ride short intervals of shoulder-in , and at the end of each shoulder-in , straighten the neck and ride towards the inside of the arena .
The hind legs fall out when the rider steers too much with the hands and fails to guard the exercise with the outside leg .
The tension in the horse ’ s topline is too high .
Because he has four legs , this causes the horse to find a way out , and he will fall out with the hind legs .
When encountering this problem , the rider must re-create relaxation and transfer it into the exercise .
Often times , it ’ s sufficient to ride a volte , making sure not to be thrown to the outside like a centrifuge .
The inside , forward-sideways-driving leg must remain in a forward position with the toe at the girth .
The horse sways if the rider ’ s weight has shifted to the outside .
In addition the rider uses too strong rein aids , which he is not able to live up to with his driving leg aids .
As a result , the horse loses rhythm and impulsion and tries to evade the rider .
To solve the problem , the rider must begin with more calmness and demonstratively sit to the inside .
Furthermore , he must be mentally riding shoulder-in before the horse enters it .
Having chosen a calm tempo at the beginning of the shoulder-in , increase the tempo step-by-step .
Ride only brief intervals of shoulder-in , interspersing it with voltes and riding straight ahead .
One loses impulsion if the angle is too large .
In this case , most of the time , the leg pairs already move on four tracks instead of three , and rhythm faults develop .
One mistake creates the next , and the horses often also become too short in their necks .
To prevent this from happening , the rider must have the horse set up correctly in preparation for the shoulder-in .
This is where most mistakes occur .
The rider will again have too much pressure in the hands , which he can ’ t live up to with his driving leg aids .
At the same time , the shoulder-in often is ridden for too long a period of time .
Quiet horses , in particular , will quickly lose impulsion .
The rider must ride short reprises of shoulder-in only and be able to end the exercise at the best moment .
If the rider exhausts each exercise he rides , the horse tends to lose joy and interest in the work .
If we riders enjoy and exhaust the beautiful exercises too often , we destroy them .
Another mistake of the rider is that he demands perfection in the first try .
Instead , approach an exercise slowly , and only demand perfection in the second or third attempt .
First , the horse must become supple , just like his rider .
The horse and rider must find each other anew at each step .
This is why , before a dressage test , one rides an exercise a few times before entering the show ring .
Tilting the head is easy to recognize .
If the ears are not level , he is tilting .
The biggest error lies in missing outside rein contact .
If the inside rein dominates , it turns the shoulder-in into some sort of “ head-in ” instead of shoulder-in .
To correct this mistake , give frequent half halts with your outside rein and relax your inside hand .
When working with a rectangular horse , avoid seeing the horse ’ s inside eye , keeping him almost straight .
A square horse doesn ’ t easily tilt his head , so when he tilts his neck , the rider must have made various mistakes .
Most often , the horse is not correctly on the driving aids and gets too short in his neck .
The rider must support the horse through his own balance so that rhythm and impulsion can develop .
At the same time , he must increase the tempo step-by-step with his inside leg .
Most of the time , the riders hands dominate over the driving leg aids .
Also , we riders tend to be a little impatient and ask for exercises in our training for which the horse isn ’ t supple enough , especially in his back .
the advantages of shoulder in Training the Shoulder-In Most of the time , I ride a shoulder-in right away in the warm-up phase at rising trot .
It helps me to gymnasticize my horses optimally for the work to come .
However , I only recommend this if the rider is balanced enough and able to support , and not impede , the horse with his aids .
For this special way of warming a horse up , most of the time I ride on the second track so the horse completely trusts my aids , even when away from the wall .
I then ride only five to eight steps of shoulder-in , and then ride a volte .
This way , I ride four to five voltes along the long side of the arena , however , it ’ s also important to ride shoulder-in and voltes along the short sides of the arena in order to control the horse better .
Here is where the biggest mistakes occur later on , since the difficult movements always begin after a short stride .
The voltes should always be five to six meters in diameters — for the square horse , the smaller volte and for the rectangular horse , the bigger volte , to make sure rhythm and impulsion remain in tact .
Also , after the warm-up phase , I prepare almost every movement with riding a shoulder-in .
I even go further .
I ride every horse during the whole training session almost always in a slight shoulder-fore .
I tell my students to “ think ” of a slight shoulder-fore and actually lead the horse ’ s forehand a hoof width to the inside of the track .
Also , on the long side , one can control the horse this way at any time and guide it into a volte , for example .
It helps horses that are particularly fearful to become more confident , with the result that the riding becomes easier .
Horses with rhythm problems at the walk benefit from riding in a slight shoulder-fore , as it stabilizes them .
In general , one must always take care to be ahead of the horse mentally .
A good rider must be able to put himself in the horse ’ s place and know what is necessary at a given moment in order to reach the goal as quickly as possible .
While the shoulder-in and shoulder-fore are not universal remedies , they are often applicable and helpful .
The key to good riding , however , is to be able to control and correct oneself constantly .
If the rider encounters a problem , he must first look for the cause in himself .
Most of the time , the rider is the cause of the problem .
Only someone who looks at his own riding critically and is willing to improve constantly and learn more will be a good rider .
Transitions for Throughness Everyone knows how important it is to balance the horse on the outside rein , but very few riders are persistent enough about it to actually achieve the goal of “ throughness . ” Everyone knows how important it is to balance the horse on the outside rein , but very few riders are persistent enough about it to actually achieve the goal of “ throughness . ” If you don ’ t have a dressage arena , map out a 20-meter circle in your riding area .
Although it ’ s not important that the circle be exactly 20 meters , it is important that it be an exact circle because you want every stride to be the same .
Find the center of your circle , and pace off 10 giant steps in four opposing directions .
Mark these points with cones .
This gives you an exact circular pathway that gives your horse a cylindrical shape to his body that balances him on the outside rein .
Mica rides Infanta from the inside leg to the outside rein on a precise circle to develop “ throughness . ” The cylindrical shape of the outside of the horse ’ s body is a sign of “ throughness . ” ( Credit : Susan J. Stickle ) Mica rides Infanta from the inside leg to the outside rein on a precise circle to develop “ throughness . ” The cylindrical shape of the outside of the horse ’ s body is a sign of “ throughness . ” ( Credit : Susan J. Stickle ) Step 1 : Point your horse ’ s nose exactly on the line of travel .
Then , with your seat and legs , shape your horse ’ s body like a banana on the arc of your circle .
Do a working trot three-quarters of the way around , then walk one-quarter .
Repeat while you help your horse find a consistent , balanced rhythm and frame in shoulder-fore .
Try to keep the same feel in your hand .
To ask for walk , keep your hands steady and push quietly against them .
Your horse should keep reaching for the hand that stays forward .
That will cause him to close his frame a little from behind while keeping the neck long .
If the connection is lacking : • Try using your inside leg with more ambition than you think you need .
This helps position his inside leg under the center of gravity and it commits him to the outside rein .
• If the contact is too light or noncommittal , use your upward transitions to push him more forward .
• If he ’ s too forward for the balance , use your half-halts and downward transitions to ask him to stabilize the balance .
Sometimes make a transition to halt , or to halt and turn-on-the-forehand , so he learns to stay under your seat and carry more weight with the hindquarters .
Step 2 : When he ’ s balanced under your seat , where two spines meet , he ’ ll feel nice in the hand .
Repeat the exercise in the other direction : Trot three-quarters and walk one-quarter .
Step 3 : Then do it with canter-trot transitions , too .
Retain the shoulder-fore position at all times .
Canter for three-quarters and trot for one quarter .
Do straight lines sometimes as well .
Step 4 : Mark off a precise 15-meter circle somewhere else and incorporate that into your riding .
Change directions often .
Soon you ’ ll refine the invisible “ Go ” and “ Whoa ” aids until you know exactly how much you need to help your horse stay connected and balanced .
He ’ ll give you a steady , self-perpetuating rhythm in relaxation and with a nice feeling in your hands .
Essential Information about the Horse ’ s Balance Issues • When left to his own devices , the horse is always eager to use his front legs and somewhat unconscious about his hindquarters .
This puts the horse out of balance and on the forehand .
• The rider can help by thinking of the horse ’ s hindquarters and his forehand as his two engines — the hindquarters are for pushing and the forehand is for pulling .
• The rider can help her horse coordinate his two engines for a better balance with half-halts and transitions that slow down the forehand and encourage the hindquarters .
• The horse isn ’ t “ straight ” by nature .
And , because his hindquarters are wider than his shoulders , his balance is , once again , naturally on the forehand .
• The rider can help her horse ’ s balance with shoulder-fore , which narrows the wide hindquarters and helps the horse step under the center of gravity .
How Can I Keep My Horse Bending in the Walk Pirouette ?
Kristina Harrison answers this reader question .
Q : When riding on the left rein and doing a turn on the haunches to the left , I always lose bend and my horse gets stiff .
When this happens , I ask my horse to finish the walk pirouette , but it doesn ’ t feel right .
What strategy do you recommend to fix this problem ?
— Marian Mendez Joliet , Illinois A : Without being able to see the problem , it ’ s difficult to determine the root of the issue .
With that being said , I ’ d like to break it down from the beginning .
Let ’ s begin with the definition of a turn on the haunches .
The horse ’ s forehand moves in even , quiet and regular steps around the horse ’ s inner hind leg while maintaining the rhythm of the walk .
The horse is bent to the inside and needs to keep an active , clear , four-beat medium walk .
It can be performed in 90 , 180 and 360 degrees .
The turn on the haunches is preparatory for the walk pirouette .
In the half turn on the haunches , in which the horse turns only 180 degrees , the inside hind leg is allowed to travel up to 1 meter and the horse is not required to step with his inside hind leg in the same spot each time it leaves the ground , but may move slightly forward .
The walk pirouette should be ridden more or less on the spot with the inside hind leg stepping up and down as the shoulders are turned .
In the walk pirouette the horse is bent to the inside , but the pirouette is performed from a collected walk and only a half meter of travel is allowed .
Like the turn on the haunches , the walk pirouette can be performed in 90 , 180 and 360 degrees .
To begin , make sure that your horse understands what you are asking him to do and that all your basic aids are in order — left leg means move right , right leg means move left and both legs mean move forward .
Sensitivity and balance are key to riding a good turn on the haunches , as the movement should be ridden by changing the balance in your body and not by pushing and pulling .
For example , if you push too hard with your outside leg within the turn on the haunches or pirouette , you will push your horse sideways and out of balance .
Address your horse ’ s sensitivity level if you feel that is a factor .
When riding a turn on the haunches or a walk pirouette , think of cutting a piece of pie .
Your outside rein and leg work together to say , “ Move over , ” and then your inside leg says , “ Step forward . ” Think of your inside leg as being a pole in the ground and your horse has to wrap himself around the pole , but not lean on it .
Note that any half halt given needs to be proportionate to the amount of impulsion and leg you have .
At the walk it is usually no more than a closing of the fist and the calf to avoid disrupting the horse ’ s balance .
Walk pirouettes and turns on the haunches require a tremendous amount of balance from the rider .
It is your job to guide your horse and initiate the movement by using the smallest of aids in order to keep and maintain the balance .
It is critical that you address any issues in your position .
If you collapse in a hip or sit crookedly to either side , it will prevent you from turning a good pirouette .
Imagine a ballerina pirouetting .
It would take very little for her to fall out of balance .
The same is true for your horse .
Sit facing the direction you are turning / traveling while maintaining equal weight on your seat bones .
Think of a Barbie doll .
Twist or rotate your core where your belt would be located , bringing your arms with you and keeping them an equal distance apart as you do this .
Then , to exit the turn on the haunches or pirouette , all you have to do is straighten your core .
If you have too much weight on your inside seat bone , your horse might stick / stop the motion and pivot with his inside hind leg .
If you sit to the outside , your horse is less likely to step forward and under and will most likely step out with his outside hind leg .
Keep the distance from your hip to your underarm the same on both sides .
It is also critical that you don ’ t pull back with your inside rein , but rather guide your horse ’ s shoulders to the inside by shifting your hands slightly sideways , allowing your outside rein and a very small half halt to initiate the movement .
If you pull back on the inside rein , you might get resistance .
This resistance can show up in the horse by exhibiting a short neck , a dropped poll , stiffening , loss of rhythm and an unsteady contact .
Also be sure not to allow him to pop the outside shoulder .
Once you have your horse on the aids and have addressed any issues in your position , check that your horse is equally supple on both reins .
Schooling leg yields , haunches-in , shoulder-in and renvers at the walk and trot helps get a more even connection .
Ask yourself if you have control of your horse ’ s shoulders and haunches in these exercises .
Is your horse in balance and aligned as you are executing these movements ?
In the shoulder-in are your horse ’ s haunches underneath you or is he stepping to the outside ?
In the haunches-in be sure your horse is truly bending , not escaping through his shoulder .
Take note of which side is easier and where else you notice the issues you describe .
It is easier to address the problem by utilizing these other movements mostly in trot .
The walk is one of the hardest gaits to address and you want to be sure you do not make a bigger problem in attempting to fix the one you have .
It sounds like your horse is not connected from your inside leg to your outside rein and that might be why you are losing suppleness .
One way to address this issue is by schooling quarter turn on the haunches .
Ride an imaginary square with the corners as the quarter turn .
This exercise will reinforce the use of your inside leg to your outside rein .
The moment you feel your horse stiffen , abort the pirouette and turn it into a leg yield , softening the horse ’ s barrel off your inside leg and reconnecting it to the outside rein to establish suppleness and a better contact .
When you take your horse into the leg yield , be sure you do it in balance and keep his alignment .
When you get comfortable with this exercise , take it to the next step , riding a quarter turn , then go out in a shoulder fore .
In the turn on the haunches , make sure not to over-bend your horse .
The amount of bend should be equal to the bend in the midline of the horse ’ s chest / body .
If you feel like your horse becomes dull to the leg , trot out of the quarter turn .
Remember it ’ s important that your horse is always forward thinking .
It also sounds like your horse might be stepping wide / out behind rather than forward and under .
Another exercise you could try is riding a haunches-in at the walk on the rail , then turn it into a half 10-meter circle to centerline then ride straight down the centerline all the while maintaining the haunches-in .
This will help your horse to think forward and sideways , improve the connection from the inside leg to the outside rein and inhibit the overuse of the inside rein .
In general , when you lose suppleness , abort the movement — in this case the turn on the haunches — and address the real issue of connection .
Never make an issue within a movement as this can make your horse tense and then riding the movement can become a bigger issue .
71 Training Tips from Four Dressage Olympians Charlotte Bredahl-Baker , Christine Traurig , Hilda Gurney and Steffen Peters share their methods for getting the most out of horses and riders .
Through the screens of our smartphones and computers , many of us watched Steffen Peters ride Legolas to a team bronze medal in Rio .
Others have admired photos of Hilda Gurney and her Thoroughbred , Keen , at the 1976 Olympics or spotted her as an “ S ” judge at C. You ’ ve probably seen images of Charlotte Bredahl-Baker and her Olympic mount , Monsieur , at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics and of Christine Traurig riding Etienne at the 2004 Olympics in Sydney.It ’ s not unusual to see these experts performing in the ring , but it is a unique opportunity when you have the chance to hear them speak personally about the theory and technique that have made them the riders we have seen so often at the top of the sport .
At the Adequan ® / California Dressage Society ( CDS ) 50th Anniversary Annual Meeting and “ Celebrating California Symposium ” in Del Mar , California , Jan. 20 – 22 , auditors gathered to observe training sessions taught by these instructors .
The participants ranged from young horses to high-performance horses , and Young Riders brimming with potential to experienced Grand Prix riders .
Charlotte-Bredahl Baker : Focus on Young Riders Charlotte Bredahl-Baker and Monsieur were on the 1992 Olympic bronze-medal-winning U.S. dressage team in Barcelona , Spain .
Charlotte was also on the silver-medal-winning U.S. team in 1997 at the North American Championships , riding Lugano .
She trained both horses from start to Grand Prix .
Charlotte is an international dressage judge ( 4 * ) and has judged all over the world .
In 2014 she was named Honorary Instructor by the USDF and received the gold medal of distinction from the USEF .
In 2014 she was appointed U.S. Assistant Youth Coach .
Charlotte ’ s session was geared toward helping two talented Young Riders , Gabriela Glumac and Ashlyn Degroot , finesse their work at the FEI levels .
Gabriela rode her 12-year-old KWPN mare , Zodessa .
Ashlyn rode her 9-year-old Dutch Warmblood mare , Dalina DG .
Throughout the work , Charlotte reminded her students to ride from back to front with elastic hands .
Here are 16 tips we learned from Charlotte ’ s session : 1 .
When you are teaching your horse something new , begin on his good side so that it is a positive experience .
2 .
When you are teaching piaffe , passage and pirouettes it is best to do everything in short sets .
“ It is better to do many short spurts than a few over an extended period , ” Charlotte said .
It is important not to get the horse muscle-sore when you are first asking for more collection .
3 .
Think about riding your horse up and in front of you .
“ Every chance you get , put your hands forward so you can meet the contact out further .
Keep thinking about the frame and keeping your horse growing in front of you . ” Both horses Charlotte was working with had a tendency to be a little short in the neck .
4 .
“ As you transition between medium , working and collected gaits , focus on riding tactful transitions while keeping your horse ’ s neck long . ” Again she was referring to the two horses who had a tendency to be a little short in the neck .
5 .
If you struggle to maintain power in the trot , just think about riding medium trot without actually performing medium trot .
Having a medium-trot mentality should create a better trot .
6 .
To ensure correct bend in the haunches-in , imagine wrapping your horse ’ s body around your inside leg .
7 .
As you prepare to ride a half pass , make sure that you get a good quality shoulder-in first .
It ensures that you start with good bend and an uphill balance when you begin the half pass .
8 .
If you find the half pass challenging , try this exercise : Ride shoulder-in .
Ride a 10-meter circle .
Return to shoulder-in for a few strides .
Turn the shoulder-in into half pass .
This exercise is effective because it breaks down the pieces of the half pass ( shoulder-in and the 10-meter circle ) and then puts them back together in a logical sequence .
9 .
When you school half pass , don ’ t stay in the movement for too long .
“ Go back to shoulder-in to regain the bend if you lose it . ” 10 .
Charlotte likes to initially school walk pirouettes on a big square .
As you progress , you can move to riding on a smaller and smaller square , she said .
11 .
In pirouette work , remember to give your horse room in the outside rein .
“ One thing I see a lot when people do walk pirouettes is that they are too strong in the outside rein .
If you restrain the horse too much with the outside rein , you won ’ t allow the horse to bend or turn .
The same thing happens in the canter pirouettes , ” she said .
“ Relax the outside rein a little to allow your horse to turn . ” 12 .
When a rider schools pirouettes , Charlotte likes to stand in the middle to keep the rider and horse using their inside legs , preventing the horse from falling in .
13 .
As you begin to ride the tempi changes , don ’ t focus on counting until later in your session .
“ I always start off the changes without counting so I can focus on the quality .
I always want to set my horse up for success by not changing unless the horse is straight and in balance . ” 14 .
To prevent your horse from losing activity in the canter pirouette work , ride medium gaits in between .
“ Sometimes you have to mix it up between mediums and pirouettes to make sure that the horse keeps thinking forward . ” 15 .
Keep your horse thinking forward in the piaffe .
“ I never walk out of the piaffe because I want the horse to come out thinking forward . ” To prevent the horse from losing forward in the passage work , Charlotte likes to mix it up with trot and / or medium trot spurts .
16 .
Utilize leg yield in the changes .
“ Using a slight leg yield between the changes reminds the rider to keep her leg on in the changes and it keeps the horse moving forward and straight .
“ Christine Traurig : Developing Young Horses Christine Traurig is the USEF young horse coach .
She was born and raised in Germany , on the farm where her father bred horses .
It was there that her passion and skill for riding young horses developed .
Christine works constantly in the United States to help today ’ s Young Riders and horses develop a commitment to basics .
At the age of 12 , she started riding at the National Riding School at Hoya with the legendary trainer Otto Meyer .
As a young adult , Christine rode and trained young horses for famous Hannoverian Auction in Verden , Germany .
She rode sale horses for German National Trainer Holger Schmezer before moving to the U.S. in 1982 .
In 1998 , Christine began training with Johann Hinnemann and in 2000 she competed at the Olympic Games in Sydney , Australia , on the bronze-medal-winning U.S. team .
She lives in Carlsbad , California .
During her session , Christine focused on advancing young horses and confirming proper basics .
She coached Craig Stanley , who rode the 5-year-old Dutch Warmblood gelding , Habanero CWS , and Anna Wood , who rode the 4-year-old Oldenburg gelding , Hotshot AF .
Here are pearls of wisdom from Christine : 17 .
Christine likes to apply the same warm-up structure to each horse she rides .
She uses that time to confirm the fundamental aids to loosen , supple and straighten her horse .
This includes the use of driving aids , containing aids and bending aids .
18 .
Remember that as you ride in a dressage saddle , you are maintaining a three-point contact with your horse : your leg aids , your seat and the bit .
19 .
Christine described the ideal response your horse should have with your inside leg : “ You want your horse off , around and ahead of your inside leg . ” 20 .
Make straightness a priority .
“ You always want to get your horse straight , which is a prerequisite to correct flexion , ” she said .
21 .
To straighten your horse , think of putting him in alignment from the poll to the tail , and keep his neck in the center of his shoulders .
22 .
Remember the specific role of each rein .
“ The inside rein indicates direction , the outside rein executes direction . ” 23 .
It is your responsibility as a rider to address your horse ’ s strengths and weaknesses .
“ Every horse has a soft side and a stiff side , and it ’ s our job to deal with that . ” 24 .
In young horses ( and all horses ) , you can promote throughness , relaxation and rhythm by riding lots of trot – canter – trot transitions .
25 .
Notice that the concept of relaxation has two components : “ Relaxation means that the horse is physically and mentally tension free . ” 26 .
Young horses must learn to go forward and stay forward while remaining calm .
“ Your horse ’ s desire to go forward must be greater than your need to remind him .
But he must stay calm in his mind and loose in his body . ” 27 .
Encourage your horse to cover ground .
“ Feel in your seat that your horse is working from his hind end toward the bit . ” 28 .
Do not teach collection to a young horse too early .
“ Use exercises that naturally encourage collection without mentally forcing it . ” 29 .
You can use exercises like shoulder-fore and 10-meter circles to naturally encourage collection .
Leg yield is useful because it teaches the horse to go forward with a degree of sideways .
30 .
When teaching a young horse the shoulder-fore , try this exercise : Ride down centerline .
Leg yield to the rail .
Ride a 10-meter circle .
Create a “ baby ” shoulder-in .
When the horse loses forwardness and impulsion , straighten him and go forward .
The leg yield makes the horse move away from the inside leg , the circle makes sure he understands the direction of the front end , then the shoulder-in combines those two ideas .
31 .
As you work toward collection , don ’ t forget about the necessity of forwardness .
“ You need the forwardness because you must have something to collect . ” 32 .
Stretching is important in every schooling session , but don ’ t let your horse think it is a break from the work .
“ Stretching is not supposed to be associated with quitting . ” 33 .
Do not underestimate the value of a 20-meter circle .
“ The work toward half pass actually begins on the 20-meter circle .
This is because you are dictating the placement of the forehand in front of the hind end . ” 34 .
The horse must be able to find trust in the rider ’ s aids .
“ When we talk about trust , it is important that we be clear about how that is developed , ” Christine said .
“ Handling must be done in a very experienced way so that the horse can trust the outcome of the influence .
This should be coupled with the rider working toward obedience and respect .
The horse needs to know that when he responds in a correct way , there is a reward . ” 35 .
Always consider your horse ’ s age and stage of training and adjust your expectations .
“ Submission is willingness to cooperate , but what creates the willingness to cooperate ? ” Christine asked rhetorically .
“ Obedience .
All of this must be done in relation to the horse ’ s age and stage of training . ” 36 .
Energy from the hind engine must be coupled with mental and physical suppleness .
37 .
You must teach the young horse to clearly understand the difference between yielding versus bending on a circle .
38 .
Always encourage the hind leg to become more weight-bearing .
To activate your horse ’ s inside leg , try this exercise : Ride a figure-eight .
Bring your horse ’ s haunches around the bending inside leg to activate the inside hind leg .
Notice how this makes the horse more supple and flexible behind the saddle .
Hilda Gurney : Lessons from a Judge ’ s Perspective Hilda Gurney has made significant contributions to the sport of dressage .
In 1976 , she earned an Olympic team bronze medal .
She won individual gold and silver and three team gold medals at the Pan Am Games .
She also took six USET National Grand Prix Championship titles on the legendary Hall of Fame member Keen .
Hilda is an S judge and has been a USDF “ L ” Education Program Instructor and has served on the USEF ’ s test writing committee .
She has a highly successful breeding program and still rides 15 to 20 horses per day .
Hilda ’ s session at the symposium incorporated her perspective as a judge .
She discussed what is expected of horse and rider through each level , which was demonstrated by Grand Prix riders Adrienne Bessey and Jodie Cressman .
Adrienne rode the 15-year-old Oldenburg gelding , Wintersnow , and Jodie rode the 15-year-old Dutch gelding , Upendo .
Here are 15 tips from Hilda : 39 .
At Training Level , judges want to see a horse who covers ground and moves forward to contact .
Halting through a walk is acceptable as long as it is straight .
40 .
Judges expect to see horses in a more uphill frame at First Level .
Transitions should be at the markers .
The walk should cover ground and the canter should have a nice jump .
41 .
Before a turn at C , do not let your horse drift before the turn .
Hilda said this is a problem she often sees at First Level .
“ You must ride straight through G and then begin your angle for the turn only after G , ” she explained .
42 .
When you ride a transition to halt , the halt must not be abrupt , which is when a horse makes quicker , hurried steps into the transition or just plants his feet .
43 .
Hilda reminded us of the value of tempo : “ Tempo enables dressage to become dancing .
Rhythm is the regularity of the pace .
Tempo is the speed of the pace . ” 44 .
In canter – trot – canter transitions at First Level , three to five steps of trot are acceptable .
45 .
If you are concerned about your horse ’ s ability to perform at First Level , take heart .
“ Every horse can learn Training Level through First Level movements , ” Hilda said .
46 .
Hilda described the challenge of dressage in a unique yet simple way : “ We are trying to teach gymnastics through a tactile language , ” she said .
47 .
At Second Level , collection is introduced .
Judges look for increased engagement , thrust and elevation .
The medium trot appears at Second Level because of the new expectation of some degree of collection .
Remember , you cannot ride a medium trot until you have an element of collection .
Hilda also explained the difference between a medium trot and a lengthened trot : “ In a lengthening , you don ’ t see as much lightness off the ground and reach in the shoulder , ” she said .
48 .
Hilda put the definition of cadence into simple terms : “ Cadence is thrust and power within rhythm . ” 49 .
At Second Level , the medium walk should be performed on the bit and should have more overstep .
“ There is not as much variation in the walk at the lower levels because the goal is to keep the gait pure , ” Hilda said .
50 .
It is not really possible to perform a medium walk to canter transition .
“ This is because you need steps of collection in the walk to rock the horse back for the canter depart . ” 51 .
At Third Level , flying changes are introduced .
You need a canter with good ground cover and suspension in the collected canter .
“ The change must be performed in the same canter you were in before the change .
Even if the change is clean , the quality of the canter has to be good . ” 52 .
Hilda explained that you need two ingredients for a good quality , clean change : A canter with good suspension and a horse who reacts well to the outside aids .
53 .
Half pass is travers on a diagonal line .
“ The legs must cross in the half pass .
This training starts at First Level because the leg yield introduces the horse to the skill of crossing his outside pair of legs over and in front of his inside pair of legs , a skill that is also needed in the half pass .
Steffen Peters : The High-Performance Level Steffen Peters was born in Germany and became a U.S. citizen in 1992 .
At the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta , he competed on Udon in his first of four Olympic Games , earning a team bronze medal .
He also represented the U.S. in Beijing in 2008 , placing fourth with Ravel , and in London , scored sixth in team competition .
He won the 2009 FEI World Cup Dressage Final in Las Vegas with Ravel .
He also won both individual and team gold medals at the past two Pan American Games .
Steffen and Legolas 92 were ranked No .
7 in the world in 2014 .
He logged his best individual finish of bronze at the World Equestrian Games in Lexington , Kentucky .
Competing in his fourth Olympics in Rio , Steffen earned team bronze with Legolas .
Steffen Peters rode his newest high-performance horse , Rosamunde , in a demonstration .
Steffen Peters rode his newest high-performance horse , Rosamunde , in a demonstration .
Kim F. Miller Steffen and his assistant , Dawn White-O ’ Connor , both participated in the High Performance segment of the symposium .
First , Steffen coached Dawn while she rode his Olympic partner , Legolas , who is known for his sensitive nature .
Steffen then rode Rosamunde , the 10-year-old Rheinlander mare who is his newest high-performance horse .
The following day , Dawn rode Aristo , a 12-year-old KWPN gelding .
Throughout the rides , Steffen explained the importance of working within your horse ’ s comfort zone and tailoring your program to what is most productive for his specific needs .
He also emphasized the necessity of quiet , precise aids .
Here are the tips Steffen left us with : 54 .
Steffen explained that Legolas has really good gaits , but he is not the most supple horse .
He is also extremely sensitive , which can be both an advantage and a disadvantage .
To get the most out of him , Steffen said it is a matter of working his body in a position that makes him feel most comfortable .
“ For every horse , you must find the most productive frame and the most productive tempo , ” he said .
For Legolas , Steffen finds it most productive to ride in a rounder frame and a slower-tempo trot .
55 .
To address suppleness in the warm-up , Steffen has a go-to exercise : Trot down the long side in counter flexion .
As you approach the short side , turn early and transition to true flexion .
As your horse is in true flexion , leg yield away from your inside leg .
Ride this exercise equally in both directions .
56 .
Do not be afraid to let hot horses go forward .
“ It ’ s tempting to ride hot horses too collected , ” he said .
Half pass is a good movement for hot horses because it allows you to actually put your leg on while the horse moves sideways .
57 .
Remember to take breaks .
“ Even with hotter horses , it ’ s important to give them a break .
It ’ s not such a good idea to wear them out .
Even if the break is just for 30 seconds . ” 58 .
Building strength is gradual .
“ Strength comes from brief moments of asking for more effort . ” 59 .
Stick with what works in the training .
Don ’ t change the routine too much .
60 .
The horse should have respect for the bit and should respond to the smallest of aids .
“ When we touch a horse on the inside rein , he should bend to the inside .
When I touch the bit ever so slightly , the horse must answer to this . ” 61 .
Get comfortable with centerlines .
“ We ride centerlines all the time in dressage , so make them your friend .
Remember , nothing changes on centerline . ” 62 .
Focus on creating a positive training experience .
Legolas gets too excited in the changes after schooling piaffe / passage , so he rides the changes first .
63 .
Choose your battles wisely .
For Legolas , Steffen says that he is comfortable with him earning a 6 or a 6.5 on the changes because some of his other movements are so much stronger .
“ We have a ‘ savings account . ’ The changes are not the savings account . ” 64 .
Have a high standard for giving aids in a really clear , correct way .
“ If the aids are that obvious , that ’ s not dressage .
Educate your horse so that he responds to gentle leg pressure . ” 65 .
Don ’ t rely on your spurs .
“ Only use the spur to correct .
The spur is not intended to ride a movement .
It cannot just support the gait or the movement .
Make a clear correction with the spur .
If you are constantly giving your horse an aid , he will get numb to it .
“ 66 .
Keep things simple .
“ You don ’ t want to feel like you have to micromanage so many little things . ” 67 .
The horse must be happy in his mouth .
“ What good are big , expressive movements if the horse isn ’ t good in the contact ? ” 68 .
Listen to your gut .
“ It ’ s important to listen to instruction , but it ’ s also important to listen to your gut feeling about when is the right time to make a correction . ” 69 .
Be decisive .
“ The wrong reaction is 10 times better than no reaction at all . ” 70 .
Test the show situation by riding the challenging movements that appear in a test .
For example , riding an expressive trot to a calm walk is difficult for Rosie , so Steffen makes sure to practice this as it appears in the tests .
71 .
Incorporate plenty of praise .
“ Stop and let your horse think about it when he ’ s done something right . ” Contact and Connection The word “ Contact ” refers to the feel between the rider ’ s hand and the horse ’ s mouth .
The Connection is between the hindquarters and the forehand of the horse .
You can have contact without connection but you cannot have connection without contact .
How does the contact develop the connection ?
When the horse goes forward in a clear and steady rhythm and he ’ s also relaxed and supple , the energy goes from a thrusting hind leg through the relaxed , swinging back and to the bit .
The horse is trained , from the beginning , to reach for the bit and accept contact .
And he is , at the same time , trained to go forward in a clear and steady rhythm with relaxation and suppleness — the first two qualities in the Training Scale .
Not to oversimplify , but if you have the first two qualities , then the development of contact has come along at the same time .
And when the back is swinging , the connection between the hindquarters and the bit develops , too .
There are energy pathways of throughness : The horse thrusts from the left hind leg to the bit on the left and from the right hind leg to the bit on the right .
These two pathways are unilateral .
There are two other important pathways of energy that are diagonal : The energy can go from the left hind to the right rein when the horse is bent left , and the energy can go from the right hind leg to the left rein when the horse is bent right .
Hence , the importance of riding inside leg to outside rein so the horse can balance on that outside rein .
When the energy from the hindquarters reaches the bit and half halts return the energy to the hindquarters , then the rider has successfully connected the hindquarters and the forehand of the horse .
The horse is not allowed to lean on the bit , but rather he should carry it .
When the contact is too strong and the horse is using the contact to carry some of his weight , the rider must half halt and / or do transitions with aids that encourage the hindquarters to step under and carry more weight .
Shoulder-Fore Shoulder-fore is simply riding straight .
With slight flexion in the direction of travel ( in this case the left ) , the rider narrows the left hind leg so it steps under the center of gravity — in the space between the two front legs .
The rider prevents the right hind from going to the right as it is naturally inclined to do .
The outside legs ( right ) are aligned and the inside hind is narrowed to the place in which it can carry the weight of horse and rider .
Impulsion and Schwung Impulsion is thrust or the release of stored energy .
You can see that impulsion is related to rhythm , or the sequence of the footfall , because the release of stored energy happens only during the moment of thrust .
In contrast , the moment of engagement is when the hind foot is flat on the ground , bearing weight with the joints bent or coiled as a spring .
The moment of thrust or release happens right after that as the hind foot leaves the ground , sending the horse into a moment of suspension , in which all legs are off the ground .
The walk doesn ’ t have a period of suspension , so it does not have impulsion .
Instead , we refer to the comparable quality as “ activity ” in the walk .
It should be active , but not hectic .
Impulsion is required in First Level , as you can see in “ The Purpose of the Tests ” sidebar on p . 27 , and is most evident , or sometimes there ’ s lack of evidence , in the lengthening of the stride that is first required at First Level .
The German word Schwung ( the fourth element of the German Training Scale ) enhances the meaning of “ impulsion ” by focusing on the swing in the horse ’ s back .
This swing of the back is evidence of a good connection between the hindquarters and the forehand .
It provides the rider with the ability to sit with tremendous coordination and it enables the rider to enhance the gaits with timely aids .
In fact , the Grand Prix rider can develop the shortened trot strides to piaffe by riding the horse ’ s back .
The horse with a swinging back can be developed ideally .
You can , perhaps , see that the previous elements of the Training Scale , instead of being compromised during training , are being enhanced .
The rhythm gets more cadenced , the suppleness is improved and the contact is more refined as the horse becomes more advanced in his training .
Straightness Horses are naturally crooked because the hind legs do not innately track directly behind the front feet .
Usually ( but not always ) , the right hind foot steps to the outside of the right fore .
Then the thrust from that right hind ( which is too far to the right ) pushes the left shoulder out , which makes the left rein heavy .
The tool for straightening horses is shoulder-fore , which isn ’ t exactly an exercise , because the wise rider is always trying to be in shoulder-fore .
Shoulder-fore is simply riding straight .
Even though Straightness is high up in the Training Scale , the rider must tend to it from the beginning .
At Training Level , the judge will notice if the 20-meter circles to the left and right are not comparable .
At First Level the judge will notice if the 10-meter circles are or are not comparable .
If the horse can easily do shoulder-fore left and right , he is straight and able to be in self-carriage at all times .
In shoulder-fore the horse is balanced laterally — from left to right and right to left — and the work becomes very easy because the horse can relax when he ’ s in balance .
When a horse is truly straight , he is also supple .
Suppling work is straightening work and vice versa .
The supple , straight horse can collect .
Collection According to the FEI Dressage Handbook , Collection is “ the increased engagement and activity of the hind legs with the joints bent and supple , stepping forward under the horse ’ s body . ” Those pushing hind legs take on the increased job of carrying , and the rider ideally has control over the ratio between the pushing and the carrying power of the hind legs .
Collection is the goal in dressage and also in jumping as the horse has to carry 100 percent of his weight on the hind legs as he thrusts in the takeoff .
There are different degrees of collection , but in dressage it is first officially required at Second Level with shoulder-in , which is called “ The Mother Exercise of Collection ” because it introduces the concept.Collection can be developed by : • lateral exercises beginning with shoulder-in , • transitions that skip a gait ( trot – halt – trot , walk – canter – walk ) , done smoothly with engagement , • the rein-back used judiciously and • half halts .
Ambitious riders who overuse their hands are taking a shortcut to the wrong destination , but riders who pay attention to every step in the Training Scale get collection on a silver platter !
Collection just happens .
It feels glorious and your horse will be as happy as you are .
Making Knowledge Useful You might have noticed that one can actually have lots of knowledge , but it ’ s not particularly useful until you can organize it .
When the filing system in your brain recategorizes certain bits of knowledge , suddenly — AHA !
A concept that you thought you understood perfectly makes even more sense now , and you ’ re able to utilize it better because you see it in a different context .
Let ’ s take Rhythm as an example .
If you didn ’ t know that rhythm was an important part of the Training Scale , you know it now .
You also know in the sidebar on the purposes of the test ( see sidebar on page 27 ) , that this quality is why you ’ re riding your Training Level test .
Now here is a little bit of information about rhythm in other contexts : • In all dressage tests , from Introductory Level to Grand Prix , the gaits are judged on “ freedom and regularity ” — the regularity of the rhythm .
• When you ask a horse to increase his power ( by adding impulsion ) , the rhythm becomes accentuated , and we call that “ cadence . ” • Rhythm can be defined as the “ characteristic sequence of footfalls , ” and you can learn which hoof initiates , for example , the right canter lead ( left hind ) .
And it helps to learn what happens next and next , which leads to : • Timing of the aids .
There ’ s a specific moment — a window of time — within each sequence of footfall of walk , trot and canter during which you should apply the aids in order to get the desired result .
• In transitions between the gaits , the rhythm changes , but in transitions within the gait , the rider needs to help the horse maintain the rhythm and tempo .
Without help , he ’ ll get quicker when the stride lengthens and slower when it shortens .
This could go on and on .
The more you learn about rhythm in different contexts , the more you really know about rhythm .
Grow your knowledge about each element in the Training Scale .
Throughness Defined Throughness is the supple , elastic , unblocked , connected state of the horse ’ s musculature that permits an unrestricted flow of energy from back to front and front to back , which allows the aids / influences to freely go through to all parts of the horse ( e.g. , the rein aids go through to reach and influence the hind legs ) .
In summation , your success in implementing this Training Scale might depend as much on your persistence as it does on your knowledge and skill .
Dressage Olympian Kyra Kyrklund once said that the difference between good riders and great riders is simply the fact that great riders are very particular about these basics .
Others let them slide .
Germany ’ s Hubertus Schmidt once said , “ Everyone knows how important it is to balance the horse on the outside rein on a 20-meter circle , but most people are too easily satisfied . ” So if Hubertus Schmidt can spend his time refining those details on a 20-meter circle , so can we .
So must we !
How to Improve Dressage Basics Delving into the Training Scale Recently , I asked an extremely competent rider a question about the Training Scale .
She hemmed and hawed , mumbled and apologized and said she knew that Collection was at the summit .
But she didn ’ t know about the basics of how to get to the summit .
Well , she ’ s not alone !
On the very same day a Dressage Today reader named Heather Collins asked for more information for newcomers to the sport .
It was not the first time we ’ d had such a request .
A few weeks earlier , a different reader had said she was sick and tired of reading about the stars of the sport instead of more relatable riders .
“ Tell me how to ride , ” she said .
So here you go .
I hope this helps .
In 1986 , the Training Scale was introduced to Americans through the translation from German to English of a chapter of German Olympian Harry Boldt ’ s book , The Dressage Horse , and it revealed — at long last — the Training Scale that the Germans had been utilizing for decades if not centuries .
The Training Pyramid , as it is sometimes called , starts with Rhythm as the most basic quality and culminates with Collection .
This scale of training serves as the framework for training all horses .
It ’ s not intended to be strictly sequential , but it is generally sequential , and sticking to the basics of this recipe for success in training horses will pay off .
It always does .
There are variations on the theme , but the theme is always there .
The Purpose of Training and First Level Tests Before you ride your dressage test , be sure to know the purpose .
You can see that the purpose of Training Level is to confirm the first three steps of the Training Scale : Training Level Purpose : To confirm that the horse demonstrates correct basics , is supple and moves freely forward in a clear rhythm with a steady tempo , accepting contact with the bit .
Next , you can see that the purpose of First Level is to introduce the fourth element of the Training Scale , Impulsion or Schwung .
First Level Purpose : To confirm that the horse demonstrates correct basics and , in addition to the requirements of Training Level , has developed the thrust &#91; impulsion &#93; to achieve improved balance and throughness and maintains a more consistent contact with the bit .
The Purposes of Second , Third and Fourth Level Tests Check out how the purposes of our dressage tests incorporate the Training Scale : Second Level Purpose : To confirm that the horse demonstrates correct basics and , having achieved the thrust required in First Level , now accepts more weight on the hindquarters ( collection ) ; moves with an uphill tendency , especially in the medium gaits ; and is reliably on the bit .
A greater degree of straightness , bending , suppleness , throughness , balance and self-carriage is required than at First Level .
Third Level Purpose : To confirm that the horse demonstrates correct basics and , having begun to develop an uphill balance at Second Level , now demonstrates increased engagement , especially in the extended gaits .
Transitions between collected , medium and extended gaits should be well defined and performed with engagement .
The horse should be reliably on the bit and show a greater degree of straightness , bending , suppleness , throughness , balance and self-carriage than at Second Level .
Fourth Level Purpose : To confirm that the horse demonstrates correct basics and , has developed sufficient suppleness , impulsion and throughness to perform the Fourth Level tests , which have a medium degree of difficulty .
The horse remains reliably on the bit , showing a clear uphill balance and lightness as a result of improved engagement and collection .
The movements are performed with greater straightness , energy and cadence than at Third Level .
Pyramid _ of _ training Rhythm Rhythm is the most basic quality because it ’ s the horse ’ s language in motion .
That is , the rider ’ s aids of communication are best understood by the horse when they are given at the right moment during the rhythm of either the four-beat walk , the two-beat trot or the three-beat canter .
Those who study music might best understand the beauty of rhythm and the self-perpetuating nature of rhythm that help the horse move in the most economical way .
Imagine yourself at work : You might be digging a hole or whipping up a cake or pumping iron at the gym .
You will be most efficient if you are doing your work in rhythm .
The terms “ working trot ” and “ working canter ” were coined as a way of helping the rider search for the rhythm and the tempo ( which is the speed of the rhythm ) in which the horse can work most economically .
Some horses , because of lack of balance , are inclined to get quicker and quicker , while some are inclined to slow down like a windup toy winding down .
If you can improve the consistency of your horse ’ s rhythm , you improve his balance , his comfort and the economy with which he moves .
Inherent in rhythm is the flexion of one set of muscles and the relaxation of the opposite muscles , and then , of course , the one set of muscles relax and the opposite ones flex .
Hence , when working in rhythm , all the muscles get a moment of relaxation within every stride .
That ’ s why well-trained dressage horses often live long , useful lives .
The rhythm of the working trot varies from horse to horse — between about 140 beats per minute ( bpm ) and 160 bpm — depending on your horse ’ s size and his way of moving , but if your horse ’ s trot is , for example , 148 bpm , he must be consistent .
You , as the rider , can help him maintain a consistent rhythm and tempo .
The tempo of the canter is usually about 96 bpm and the tempo of the walk is often about 100 bpm .
If you ride with a metronome , you can work on helping your horse retain the tempo of this rhythm .
Then you learn , without the metronome , to be the metronome for your horse .
You can also use cavalletti to give you and your horse the feeling for correct rhythm .
As an aside , self-perpetuating rhythm in motion not only improves the horse ’ s physical balance but also his mental balance and the rider ’ s mental balance and comfort .
There ’ s something great about knowing what ’ s going to happen next , and correct rhythm is self-perpetuating .
Relaxation and Suppleness The USDF says that the second step of the Training Scale is Relaxation .
Remember the flexion and relaxation that occur when the rhythm is consistent ?
When that moment of relaxation is missing , you can ’ t go much farther in the training of your horse because development requires that muscles receive the circulation of blood and oxygen in order to strengthen .
Of course , we all know that it ’ s hard enough sometimes to relax ourselves let alone try to help another living being ( who is sometimes nervous or frightened ) to relax .
Within the sport of dressage , there are many basic exercises that help horses relax .
Most , if not all of them , entail bending and stretching .
Bending promotes lateral relaxation and stretching promotes longitudinal relaxation .
Studying a sport that has fans from different cultures has complications , but also has the enriching aspect of revealing the subtleties between different languages .
So the international governing body , the FEI , calls the second step of the Training Scale Suppleness — another English word that has slightly more meaning .
It can be said that you can be relaxed but not supple ( such as when you ’ re lying on the beach ) , but you can ’ t be supple without relaxation .
Suppleness implies that there is relaxation as well as some amount of energy working through the body .
So the ideal jogger is relaxed and supple .
The horse can ’ t really bend and stretch well without being relaxed and supple .
But encouraging him to bend and stretch promotes both of these qualities .
Patience When the first three elements of the Training Scale are understood and demonstrated by both horse and rider , they present a lovely picture .
The ideal Training Level horse is beautiful .
However , attaining this level shouldn ’ t take forever .
Three- and 4-year-old horses are often born to go forward in a clear and steady rhythm , be supple and accept contact with the bit .
So don ’ t set the bar too low .
Clinicians often see young horses who are inconsistent , not on the bit , tense and demonstrating poor rhythm .
The excuse is that the horse is young .
But often the rider isn ’ t even making her wishes known clearly to the horse .
Patience is sometimes a virtue , but not if the horse is uncomfortable and out of balance just because the rider hasn ’ t helped him to a better balance by explaining the first three elements of the Training Scale to him .
10 Tips for Better Dressage Trot Lengthenings Advice on how to ride an essential dressage training tool , the trot lengthening .
In a dressage trot lengthening , the horse pushes himself from behind and through his whole body into longer , suspended strides .
He covers as much ground as he can in balance .
According to the U.S. Dressage Federation &apos;s Glossary of Judging Terms , lengthening is defined as &quot; Elongation of the stride and the outline of the horse , yet maintaining the same tempo &#91; beats per minute &#93; and balance as in the corresponding working pace . &quot;
Here I &apos;ll give you 10 tips to improve the lengthening : 1 .
The lengthening is a whole-bodied movement for your horse ... that is , it must go from thrusting hind feet all the way to the bit .
2 .
Expect your horse to reach for the bridle in the lengthening .
&quot; Reach &quot; is the operative word .
Allow his whole body--not just his strides--to lengthen .
Soften your hand so he feels he can reach , but don &apos;t throw away the contact .
3 .
The lengthening should stabilize the contact without making it heavy or inflexible .
Your horse should still be responsive to slight suppling aids to the left and right .
4 .
Lengthenings can only be developed from a correct working trot .
5 .
Be very picky and precise about your line of travel during the lengthening so that your horse &apos;s effort goes &quot; through &quot; his body .
6 .
You should feel suspension in the lengthening .
7 .
Keep the same tempo in the lengthening , even if you don &apos;t get the amount of reach that you want .
If your horse gets fast , he has lost his balance onto the forehand .
If it feels slightly slower , that &apos;s a good sign because it takes longer to make a big stride than it does to take a small stride .
8 .
If your horse loses his balance in the lengthening , half halt and circle to get it back .
9 .
Incorporate suppling exercises with all lengthenings so your horse doesn &apos;t get stiff and difficult in the downward transitions .
For example , on the diagonal line , you can do a few steps of leg yield in the middle or toward the end of the lengthening .
Be sure your horse &apos;s shoulders stay on the exact diagonal line .
10 .
Don &apos;t expect to get your best lengthening the first time you ask .
Your horse &apos;s efforts will improve with repetition .
He &apos;ll get &quot; into it &quot; when he feels the freedom you have given him .
Let the Leg Yield Work for You This exercise helps horses become more flexible in the shoulders , back and hips and develops the connection through the horse ’ s body .
The leg yield is an excellent tool that I use often with horses of all levels .
This exercise helps horses become more flexible in the shoulders , back and hips .
Also , riding leg yields develops the connection through the horse ’ s body from both the rider ’ s legs and seat bones to both reins .
What Is It ?
The leg yield is an exercise done at the walk and trot .
The horse should not have bend in the body as he moves sideways away from the direction of his flexion .
The horse ’ s front and hind legs should cross in relation to the angle of the leg yield .
I remind students to feel an even contact on both reins during the leg yield .
For an exercise that develops the connection , the horse ’ s neck and poll must be coming straight out of the shoulders .
The priority in the leg yield is to first supple the body .
Then I make sure there is correct and steady flexion in the poll away from the direction of movement .
There are good reasons to use the leg-yield exercise in your training , which include the following : • The leg yield is a gymnastic exercise for the horse because his legs cross over one another to loosen the body .
The muscles and joints warm up and stretch during the leg yield to help the horse become supple , which then allows him to relax , breathe and soften his back .
• The exercise allows you to feel the horse ’ s sides with your leg , which allows you to test and see if he is in front of your leg .
Each day you must make sure both sides of the horse respond evenly to your leg aids .
The leg yield helps you feel the horse ’ s reaction and fix any problems .
• You develop the connection because you move the horse ’ s inside hind leg to the outside rein .
During and after the exercise , the goal is that the horse has an even connection on both sides from the seat and leg to the rein .
Aids The leg yield along the wall is a good place to learn and perfect the aids for the leg yield .
Begin with the horse at a regular rhythm and tempo in the medium walk to the right on the second track or slightly off the wall .
Keep the horse ’ s neck straight on the long side and ask for slight left flexion .
Next , use the left leg and seat bone to ask the horse to bring his haunches in toward the center of the ring while his shoulders stay on the second track .
He should walk at about a 30-degree angle along the wall .
Feel your leg asking in the rhythm of the walk for each step , not just a constant squeeze .
If the horse does not respond well to your leg , use a tickle of the spur or whip to send him sideways .
Simultaneously , keep the contact even on both reins and use squeezes on the right rein to keep the horse ’ s body straight and to control the shoulder .
Think of the left hind leg stepping into the right rein as you receive that connection .
Make sure your body is straight and pointed toward the wall at the same angle as the horse ’ s chest .
When you get to the corner and straighten the horse , keep the same receiving quality in the contact .
I often use this exercise in the warm-up to loosen up my horse .
Try it in the trot as well .
Advanced Exercise Leg yield in and out on a 20-meter circle is more difficult , but it makes the horse even more supple and improves the connection .
Once you and the horse understand the aids of leg yield along the wall , begin on an 18-meter circle at the medium walk or working trot tracking left .
Because the circle is so big , the horse is only bent slightly to the inside .
Use the aid for leg yield from the left leg and carefully push the horse out onto the 20-meter circle .
On the 20-meter circle , straighten the horse and change the flexion to the right .
Leg yield in from the right leg back onto the 18-meter circle .
Do not focus on leg yielding in or out quickly or steeply .
Instead , make sure you ask yourself these questions : • Does my horse maintain rhythm , regularity and balance during the exercise ?
• Do I maintain my balance in the saddle ?
• Am I always in control of my horse ’ s hips and shoulders ?
• Is the change of flexion smooth ?
• Do I feel an improvement in the quality of the connection ?
Try the exercise in both directions .
Use the feeling from the exercise to supple and connect the horse on any line or figure where he loses lateral balance .
In other words , if you feel him falling in during the corner , you can use the leg yield to push him out and keep him connected on the outside rein .
Or if he falls out through the shoulder during a circle , you can use the outside rein and leg as if to leg yield , but you , in fact , just control the outside of his body .
Incorporate the leg yield into your daily routine and reap the benefits of a more supple and better connected ride .
Preparing the Young Dressage Horse for Success Experts discuss the weanling-to-3-year-old stage Just as we carefully prepare young children for school and life by playing with them , teaching them lessons and taking them on excursions , young horses need a similar education .
There are enormous lessons to be learned before the young horse is backed .
The traditional approach is to leave youngsters out in a herd for two to three years with occasional handling before bringing them into the human world to be backed .
However , Canadian Grand Prix dressage rider Shannon Dueck points out , “ You are then counting on the breeding to determine their trainability , and they have to learn about people , stables and ground manners in a very short period of time .
That ’ s a big change for them and can be quite stressful . ” It can be argued that the early years should not be wasted .
In Part 1 of this two-part series , we learn how early lessons provide the first steps in establishing trust in humans , influencing the young horse ’ s natural instinct to flee .
Case Study : MW Angelika The critical “ kindergarten years , ” from six months to 3 years , can determine how the horse will behave for the rest of his life .
For her talented filly , MW Angelika ( Angel ) , Dueck wants to “ stack the deck for trainability . ” When breeding her Grand Prix dressage mare Ayscha , in 2014 , Dueck turned to Jen Vanover of Maplewood Warmbloods , in Middletown , New York .
Vanover selected the Hanoverian stallion Franziskus as having the best chance to complement Ayscha and make the most improvements .
Once Angel was born and Dueck saw the filly ’ s potential , three of her long-time clients joined her to form a syndicate , Ayscha ’ s Angels , to support Angel ’ s journey of training to Grand Prix .
Angel was enrolled in the Young Horse Rearing Program at Greengate Farm in New Braintree , Massachusetts .
Established in 1989 by Rachel Ehrlich and her husband , Warren , the facility focuses on breeding premium-quality Hanoverian sport horses and training youngsters .
Ehrlich ’ s systematic approach to learning starts when the foal is 2 days old and a halter is put on .
Gradually , step by step , lessons are introduced over the next three years in preparation for backing and riding .
The No .
1 goal is to establish trust with humans .
This is achieved through relaxation and creating a positive mindset for learning .
When Angel arrived at Greengate Farm as a weanling , “ she had not developed her frame of reference to people , ” says Ehrlich .
“ She was sensitive and always on alert like her dam . ” Angel showed this through resistance in her body language with her head up , back tense and hiding in corners .
Ehrlich explains : “ It was as if she was saying , ‘ This is difficult for me to focus on with you .
I don ’ t know if I want to do this now .
I want to go back to my friends . ’ ” Ehrlich and her assistant , Michaela Dupuis , started Angel with short sessions of five to 10 minutes , sometimes twice a day , at first just standing near the filly to build trust and confidence .
Then they ’ d touch her and put her halter on and take it off .
“ Angel learned to be in a safe space with us for grooming , body work , picking up her legs and leading , first in her stall then in an adjoining paddock , ” says Ehrlich .
Like many youngsters , Angel was going through a process of development and learning wihout the mother ’ s support .
Early Lessons The early lessons consist of piggybacking , or doing a little at a time to create trust .
“ If a young horse trusts me in something , then OK , let ’ s do something else , ” Ehrlich explains .
“ If problems arise , we don ’ t get upset .
We just decrease the stimulus and go back to the trust / safety zone .
We increase and then decrease the stimuli . ” Leading .
For Angel ’ s leading lessons , two handlers were involved and a cotton lead rope was used .
A chain is inappropriate for a yearling , but if you need extra reinforcements , you can place Vetwrap over the chain to make it less severe and then take the chain over the nose and diagonally across and under the chin to stabilize the halter .
If extra control is needed , never severely shank the youngster because it can lead to head shying or rearing .
Angel was quick to learn the leading lesson .
However , if a youngster refuses to go forward , pulling on the lead creates pressure behind the poll , causing panic , and using a whip can incite fear .
Instead , one handler stands at the head and the other at the side , pushing the youngster forward with a hand on the thigh or by using a butt rope .
Take a second lead rope long enough to cross over the youngster ’ s back and pass it under the tail to lie over the thighs — creating a figure eight — and apply gentle pressure .
Be sure the youngster accepts being touched before introducing the butt rope .
If the youngster still refuses to go forward , try moving in a zigzag line , as a bent neck makes it harder to resist .
If the youngster stops , don ’ t give in , just repeat the process .
Tying .
Angel systematically learned to be tied and to stand still .
While eating , she was initially restrained with the lead only looped through the wall ring in her stall in case she panicked and pulled back .
Later , the lead was tied in a quick-release knot for short periods with someone nearby .
Standing .
Angel learned to stand and understand voice commands of “ whoa ” or “ stand ” together with a slight tug on the lead .
If Angel moved , she was immediately corrected , returned to the designated spot and the voice command repeated .
She had to stand for only a few seconds before being praised and then led forward again .
Over time , she stood for longer periods .
Piggybacking is incremental , using baby steps all the way .
Blanketing .
Ehrlich introduces all her foals to the blanket , and Angel needed only a quick introduction .
First she sniffed it , then it touched her shoulder and was stroked over her neck , legs and back .
The blanket was then folded into a small oblong shape , draped on her withers and slowly unfolded , one section at a time .
Each step proceeds only when the youngster is relaxed .
Blanketing is the first step for backing and riding .
Vacuuming and hosing .
Gradually , Angel was introduced to scary new challenges like the vacuum .
First , she heard the noise , next she was touched with the unplugged equipment , then she saw another horse vacuumed and , finally , she was vacuumed .
Likewise , she became accustomed to the hose , spray bottles and other barn items .
For water , she first saw the hose , then it was turned on and gradually water run over her feet and slowly up her legs .
If necessary , a wet sponge can be used to wipe the legs to accustom the youngster to water .
Never tie a young horse during these lessons due to risk of injury or stress .
Remember , the youngster has three years to master these lessons , so never rush or use force .
The goal is to establish trust .
Trailering .
Ehrlich has a comprehensive multi-step approach to trailering .
First the foal learns to trailer alongside the mother and then the yearling is taught the lesson anew .
A four-horse trailer with rear and side ramps is backed up to the barn aisle , where the youngster feels safe .
The partitions are removed and an older companion horse is led onto the trailer and then off the side ramp .
The yearling follows in procession , stopping only for a few seconds .
The process is repeated several times .
Once this task is mastered , it is reversed , with the horse and yearling going up the side ramp and off the back ramp .
A pair of box stalls are then created in the trailer , with a gate separating them , and two yearlings are loaded .
The youngsters stand in their stalls loose with hay nets .
The process is repeated until the yearlings stay calm and relaxed .
Then they go for a short ride down the driveway .
The youngsters are not restrained at this point .
However , for the next phase , they are tied in the box stall facing each other with hay nets .
Then the yearlings are put on the trailer side by side in standing stalls .
( Ehrlich has gates in front of each stall so youngsters can ’ t go over or under the breast bar . )
The yearlings stay in the standing stall for a time and are led out .
They also walk up the side ramp and are backed into the standing stall .
When ready , the youngsters go for a short ride in the standing stall .
For owners with a two-horse trailer , the partition can be removed and a box stall created with straw bales lining the inside for added protection .
Be aware that many trailers have only an inside latch on the exit / escape door and accidents can occur if youngsters open the latch and try to escape .
An outside bolt on the door may need to be installed for safety .
With a two-horse trailer , it is best to transport the yearling in a box stall and introduce the standing stall only when the youngster is bigger and can ’ t escape under the breast bar .
Another option is to create a barrier with plywood so the horse can ’ t go over or under the breast bar .
After each session , Angel rejoined her buddies in the field .
She learned that there was work time and play time .
Having playmates of a similar age allows youngsters to learn herd dynamics and teaches them about pecking order .
But in training , it is the human that ultimately must be the head of the herd .
The earlier a weanling learns this , the easier training progresses .
The goal is to build a strong relationship of respect and trust between human and horse , but the partnership isn ’ t 50 / 50 .
Ideally , the relationship should be a 60 / 40 partnership .
“ That ’ s what is going to keep you safe in the long run , ” says Ehrlich .
“ You don ’ t want them to learn that they ’ re bigger than you are . ” Training Theories “ Operant conditioning ” is a term coined by behaviorist B.F. Skinner in 1938 .
According to Skinner ’ s premise , behavior is strengthened when followed by positive reinforcement and weakened when followed by punishment .
For Ehrlich , it is less about punishment and more about reward .
If a youngster becomes anxious or distracted with a task , she backs off the pressure , asks for only a small step of progress , gives verbal praise and turns to something more familiar for the youngster .
The original lesson can be repeated later in smaller increments .
Proprioception is the sense of knowing where all the parts of the body are positioned at any given time .
In humans , the brain integrates information from proprioceptors ( sensory receptors on nerve endings found in the muscles , joints , tendons and inner ear ) to give us our sense of body position and movement .
It ’ s what allows a person to walk in the dark without falling .
For young horses , a sense of body awareness is often lacking relative to what the handler is asking of them .
Ehrlich incorporates patterns of movement into early training to improve physical coordination while encouraging cooperation and trust .
Exercises are based on the system of equine behaviorist Linda Tellington-Jones and , more recently , work learned with Australian dressage rider and trainer Tristan Tucker .
The groundwork theory developed by Tellington-Jones , consists of leading exercises and obstacles to improve the horse ’ s balance , coordination and ability to learn in a relaxed state .
In the exercises , the handler uses a whip as an extension of his arm to signal to the horse .
It is not used for punishment but acts as a directional cue and also helps focus the horse on the task at hand .
Credit : From Dressage with Mind , Body &amp; Soul ; Courtesy , Trafalgar Square Books The groundwork theory developed by Linda Tellington-Jones consists of leading exercises and obstacles , such as the Labyrinth exercise shown here that improves the horse ’ s balance , coordination and ability to learn in a relaxed state .
Credit : From Dressage with Mind , Body &amp; Soul ; Courtesy , Trafalgar Square Books The groundwork theory developed by Linda Tellington-Jones consists of leading exercises and obstacles , such as the Labyrinth exercise shown here that improves the horse ’ s balance , coordination and ability to learn in a relaxed state .
The Labyrinth Exercise Rachel Ehrlich of Greengate Farm in New Braintree , Massachusetts , is partial to the Labyrinth exercise of Linda Tellington-Jones .
It uses six poles , 10- to 12-feet long , placed in a pattern on the ground 4 feet apart ( see photo on p . 44 ) .
The purpose is to teach patience , obedience and focus while helping with balance , flexibility and coordination .
The horse is guided through the labyrinth , stopping before each tight turn , and sometimes taking only one or two steps at a time .
The exercise also is used to practice moving backward .
Tucker ’ s Response Training system involves teaching techniques and exercises that allow the horse to relax and have a place to go when frightening objects or situations arise .
The goal is to influence the horse ’ s natural flight instinct and to teach him how to function in the human world .
For Tucker , training starts as soon as the foal can stand , first by introducing human touch , then applying physical pressure to establish body awareness and , finally , teaching to lead and accept pressure .
Once the foal understands body control and reacts appropriately to pressure for guidance , Tucker introduces the three environmental elements that trigger the horse ’ s natural fight-or-flight response : movement , touch and sound .
Credit : Annemarie Field Australian dressage rider and trainer Tristan Tucker ’ s Response Training system involves teaching techniques and exercises that allow the horse to relax and have a place to go when frightening objects or situations arise .
Here Tucker works with Dueck ’ s filly MW Angelika ( Angel ) .
Credit : Annemarie Field Australian dressage rider and trainer Tristan Tucker ’ s Response Training system involves teaching techniques and exercises that allow the horse to relax and have a place to go when frightening objects or situations arise .
Here Tucker works with Dueck ’ s filly MW Angelika ( Angel ) .
Credit : Annemarie Field Once a foal understands body control , Tucker introduces the three environmental elements that trigger the horse ’ s natural fight-or-flight response : movement , touch and sound .
He ’ ll start with a whip and then attach a plastic bag to the end of it and , finally , introduce a waving flag .
Credit : Annemarie Field Once a foal understands body control , Tucker introduces the three environmental elements that trigger the horse ’ s natural fight-or-flight response : movement , touch and sound .
He ’ ll start with a whip and then attach a plastic bag to the end of it and , finally , introduce a waving flag .
Tucker starts with a whip touching the youngster ’ s body .
Later he attaches a plastic bag to the end of the whip , and then introduces a waving flag .
He applies minimal pressure at first and removes the pressure when the horse relaxes , lowering his head , softening his eyes and moving his ears .
Tucker incorporates leg patterns into his training to reduce tension .
By controlling the horse ’ s feet and bending the body , the trainer encourages the youngster to become physically soft and mentally relaxed .
The objective is to apply , reduce and increase pressure ; create relaxation through physical movement ; and influence the horse to approach an object because he feels in control .
Additional Lessons Initially , going to the covered arena was frightening for Angel .
Her neck came up and she threw her head around , trying to escape .
After visits with a companion horse , she relaxed .
Ehrlich placed the whip on her back and croup to calm and focus her .
Then the handler tapped the croup to ask Angel to go forward and placed it on her shoulder to ask her to move away from the handler .
Once Angel was comfortable being led in various directions and patterns in the indoor , the handler introduced obstacles and objects ( some making noise ) one at a time : a ball , plastic bag , flag , umbrella , streamers , jump stands , ground poles , tarp and other items .
The purpose of this lesson is for the youngster to stay relaxed and focused , trusting and waiting for the handler .
At first Angel was anxious about the objects , and lessons were kept short — no more than 10 to 15 minutes .
She was encouraged to approach the objects and touch them but wasn ’ t forced toward them .
“ When you push a horse past something , you can shut them down mentally .
This fact is often expressed as physical resistance , ” explains Ehrlich .
After multiple sessions , Angel relaxed .
She went from snorting at the umbrella closed on the ground to having it opened , waved and touching her body .
Safety is paramount during this learning process .
Follow these rules : Find someone to help you , work in an enclosed arena without distractions , allow enough space so you can move out of the way if needed , wear gloves and a helmet , never tie a youngster and never wrap a lead around your hand .
Adding Equipment Angel was gradually introduced to the saddle pad , bridle and surcingle at the end of her yearling summer .
She also became familiar with long lines touching her body .
Ehrlich doesn ’ t longe young horses due to strain on muscles and joints .
Instead she teaches youngsters long-lining when they are 2 .
All the yearlings have a break in late fall except for daily grooming .
When training is resumed for a 2-year-old , Ehrlich first goes through a checklist of what is known and then adds to the learning .
New ground patterns , objects and sounds are introduced , long-lining commences and the youngsters may free-jump in a chute .
In the fall of her 2-year-old year , Angel will be introduced to the saddle , and weight in the stirrups and over her body , and finally a rider will sit on her , but only at the walk .
She then will have time off , and the following spring the process will resume .
The early years can make or break a horse ’ s desire to work with humans .
“ &apos; Breaking ’ is a poor choice of words for how we should train young horses , ” adds Dueck .
“ They need to respect us first because they are big and can be quite dangerous if they don ’ t .
But with thoughtful and systematic training long before they are ridden , we can instill a desire to work with us and understand our requests .
I think everyone would agree , it ’ s incredible to develop that kind of partnership with these beautiful creatures . ” Systematic Dressage Training with Cindy Ishoy How to set up an organized , effective program for your dressage horse .
For centuries , the gymnastic training system of dressage has proven highly effective for both starting young horses and schooling up through Grand Prix .
It works for creatures of habit , like the horse , because it allows them to know what is expected and is very regimented .
This is because everything you begin at Training Level is the first step on the journey to upper-level work .
It ’ s systematic , meaning that nothing ever really changes — the aids are always the same through each level of training .
For example , the aids for a well-ridden 20-meter circle are almost the same as the aids for a canter pirouette .
The only difference is that , at the higher levels , the horse is stronger because the rider has incorporated all the other elements of the training scale — rhythm , suppleness , contact , impulsion , straightness and collection .
Over the years , I have found that this systematic training works for all horses , regardless of their breed .
I have also learned the importance of incorporating certain factors into my dressage training and I would like to share these with you .
Training Philosophy — Understanding the Horse When training , it is important to keep in mind : 1 .
The horse ’ s talent level ( his strength and ability ) 2 .
The rider ’ s ability to listen to the horse and recognize when and how the training should proceed 3 .
The rider ’ s belief in the training .
Cindy Ishoy teaches Kahla Ishoy on Viva La Vita , her 5-year-old Canadian Warmblood .
Cindy Ishoy teaches Kahla Ishoy on Viva La Vita , her 5-year-old Canadian Warmblood .
Recognizing your horse ’ s physical and mental capabilities is a very important part of his training .
For example , you can ’ t take a 4-year-old and ask him to do 15 steps of piaffe like a Grand Prix horse .
He ’ s not strong , supple , collected or balanced enough to do it .
Plus , he doesn ’ t have the head for it yet .
You have to build up your horse ’ s mental ability and physical fitness through systematic gymnastic exercises .
You start out small and increase as his fitness and strength grow .
Some people make the mistake of riding their young or green horse twice a week to go easy on him .
That ’ s the worst way to approach his training because it ’ s not systematic .
A lot of time and energy are wasted because he comes out fresh and disobedient and doesn ’ t remember much from the last time he was ridden .
The better plan is to ride for 20 minutes six days a week .
That consistency will build his physical and mental fitness .
Start off by doing basic exercises in walk , trot and canter .
He should be able to do all the upward and downward transitions easily without throwing his head or kicking at your leg aids , and he should be willing to take contact easily .
Riding your horse consistently , fairly and gymnastically will set him up physically and mentally .
He tells you when he ’ s ready to learn something new by responding to the aids more readily .
Neil Ishoy rides Donatello 107 , a 9-year-old Holsteiner gelding owned by Angela Cook .
Riding your horse consistently , fairly and gymnastically will set him up physically and mentally .
He tells you when he ’ s ready to learn something new by responding to the aids more readily .
Neil Ishoy rides Donatello 107 , a 9-year-old Holsteiner gelding owned by Angela Cook .
As the horse matures and gets stronger , you can start to introduce big circles and big serpentines , shoulder-in and travers .
He should be able to do 20-meter , 12-meter and 10-meter circles consistently , in balance with good tempo .
This is a much better approach when starting a green horse .
Riding him consistently , fairly and gymnastically will set him up physically and mentally .
He will have a good basic foundation for further training by the end of this first year .
Your horse will tell you when he ’ s ready to learn something new when he responds to the aids more readily .
He will be able to do that once his physical conditioning improves and the work gets easier for him .
Don ’ t make the mistake of trying to advance him before he is ready .
You can ’ t approach the training by thinking , Today is the day I ’ m going to do half pass .
If your horse isn ’ t ready , he will resist and the whole system breaks down .
If he ’ s unhappy in his work , he ’ s telling you something .
Perhaps you are pushing before he ’ s ready .
Is he balanced enough to do what you ’ re asking of him ?
Is he physically and mentally ready to do what you want ?
Be sure to watch for these signs and listen to your horse all the time .
You may have to go back a few steps and work on the basics through systematic gymnastic exercises .
And keep in mind that what you don ’ t get today , you ’ ll get later .
Set Up Your Gymnastic Program If you stick to a program , your horse is going to be better and you are going to be a better rider .
Consistent work makes training kinder because riders are clearer about what they are asking for and horses are fit enough to do what is asked of them .
So dressage training becomes more understandable to both horse and rider .
There are many gymnastic exercises to choose from .
As you ride these sample exercises , keep these tips in mind and practice them every day : • Ride figures correctly and accurately .
For example , 20-meter circles should be round and ridden from letter to letter ; three- or four-loop serpentines should be ridden with even , accurate loops .
• Keep an even contact with the reins with steady , quiet hands .
Keep the same weight balanced on both sides of your horse ’ s mouth .
• Think forward energy , keeping your horse in front of your leg and on the aids by driving with your seat .
Every well-ridden corner is a suppling exercise .
Remember to keep your outside hand down and your inside leg on .
Every well-ridden corner is a suppling exercise .
Remember to keep your outside hand down and your inside leg on .
Warming up .
Every systematic program begins with warming up .
Most people don ’ t spend enough time warming up at the beginning of each ride , and it ’ s really important .
The idea is to get the horse loose and supple ( bending left and right , longitudinally and laterally ) and then moving straight ( hind hooves steady ) .
Try to maintain a natural tempo , not too fast , keeping your horse straight , especially down the long side between the letters .
Keep your outside hand down and your inside leg on , pushing to the outside aid .
Keep your hands quiet and try to maintain really consistent contact .
Remember to always ride from track to track and be very accurate .
When you finish your circle at C , change rein across the diagonal , keeping the same 1 – 2 , 1 – 2 tempo like a metronome .
Ride your corner properly because it is a suppling exercise in and of itself .
Keep the same , steady , 1 – 2 , 1 – 2 tempo as you ride straight across the diagonal .
Keep the same , steady , 1 – 2 , 1 – 2 tempo as you ride straight across the diagonal .
Ride trot – canter transitions .
Begin at C sitting trot , transition to canter on the left lead and ride straight down the long side in a slight shoulder-fore position .
At F , transition to trot and cross the diagonal , keeping your horse nice and straight .
At C , transition to canter right lead .
Try to feel the jump in the canter , riding him forward with lots of energy from the back end to the front end .
Take walk breaks and let the horse stretch his neck and relax during and after the warm-up .
You can begin the next phase of your gymnastic program , which might include exercises such as these : Change the pace within the gait .
As you proceed with this exercise , remember to always ride with a slight shoulder-in to bring the horse ’ s shoulder off the track and keep him straight throughout the exercise .
It ’ s the lengthening and shortening of the canter stride that makes this exercise gymnastic .
For example , go from collected to working and back to collected canter within each circle and down the long side .
1 .
Pick up a canter on the long side .
2 .
At the corner , collect ( use your half halts to help him rebalance ) , keeping a slight shoulder-in .
A horse ’ s shoulder is narrower than his hind so they have to be slightly in for him to be straight .
3 .
Go down the next long side in medium canter .
4 .
Circle at E in working canter and then collect .
5 .
Ride working canter straight down the long side and then collect again in the corner .
6 .
Go across the diagonal and repeat on the other lead .
Ride 10-meter circles with simple changes at the end of each : 1 .
From a collected walk , pick up canter left lead at C. 2 .
Ride three 10-meter circles down the long side with a transition to walk at the end of each circle .
Collect before asking for the walk transitions and make sure your geometry is accurate .
3 .
Keep your horse slightly bent in the jowl to the inside and balanced on the outside rein .
Think about riding forward into the walk , not pulling back .
4 .
If needed , give him a kick to create the energy from behind , and then relax your leg so you ’ re not carrying him ; rather , he ’ s carrying you .
systematictraining-sidebar Serpentine of three loops at trot : 1 .
Begin a three-loop serpentine from C to A going from wall-to-wall with three even loops .
2 .
Keep your shoulders back and parallel to your horse ’ s shoulders .
3 .
Keep the horse slightly bent to the inside with an even contact on the outside rein with every new bend .
Use your inside leg to push him out to the new outside rein , too .
4 .
Finish each loop at the track .
Be accurate and round out your corners .
5 .
After the serpentine , ride into the corner and change rein across the diagonal line in the same rhythm .
Serpentine of three loops at canter ( with simple or flying changes ) .
In this exercise , your horse has to change on your aid , but if he gets ahead of you and starts anticipating the change , bring him back to walk .
When you correct him , don ’ t kick and pull him at the same time .
That ’ s a conflicting aid and unfair .
Collect and transition to canter on a10-meter circle and pick up the pattern again , and this time do the changes through walk .
When he ’ s listening to you , pick up the canter again and get back on your serpentine but don ’ t try a change until you ’ ve got his rhythm and tempo back .
Keep the energy forward because if he doesn ’ t stay active enough and slows down his changes , he will have a tendency to be late behind .
1 .
Start a three-loop serpentine from C to A.
Go from wall to wall with three , even loops , each 20 meters in width .
2 .
When you cross centerline , ask for a change of lead and continue in canter .
3 .
As you cross centerline again , ask for another change of lead back to true canter .
In the next loop , ask for a change of lead when you cross the centerline .
4 .
Stay in canter around the corner and then repeat the serpentine Positive Gymnastic Training Systematic gymnastic dressage training is proactive because it ’ s about positive reinforcement .
Never turn down or reprimand your young horse when he offers something to you .
It may not be what you want , but don ’ t discourage him from doing something that you ’ re going to ask for later on .
For example , if you ask for the canter and he picks up the wrong lead , don ’ t treat it as a mistake .
You will be training counter-canter eventually , so be proactive .
Make the exercise gymnastic by staying in the counter-canter for a few strides before going back to the walk .
Keep him relaxed and repeat the aid for true canter again .
As the horse matures and gets stronger , you can start to introduce shoulder-in and travers .
He should be able to do circles of 10 and 20 meters in balance and with good , consistent rhythm .
As the horse matures and gets stronger , you can start to introduce shoulder-in and travers .
He should be able to do circles of 10 and 20 meters in balance and with good , consistent rhythm .
One of the biggest faults in dressage training is that people don ’ t spend enough time on the basics — rhythm , suppleness and contact .
The tricks in this sport are really not that tough .
The one-tempi , pirouette , piaffe and passage are not so difficult .
But getting the horse loose , getting the contact right and having a horse that wants to perform for you is difficult and more important to achieve .
You just have to sit there like you ’ re in halt and let the horse do his job underneath you .
As soon as you start clamping and forcing , you create tension , which doesn ’ t work .
A systematic gymnastic approach simplifies the training , which allows the horse and rider to keep a positive attitude .
It is regimented , so it builds up confidence in both horse and rider because they know what is expected of them .
It ’ s consistent , which provides a clear understanding of how to apply and build on the aids throughout the levels .
And it makes training kinder because it builds on the physical and mental fitness of your horse so that he is ready , willing and able to perform what is asked of him .
Good race horses love to run , good jumpers love to jump and good dressage horses love to train .
They ’ re amazing animals and what they do for us is amazing .
We ’ ve got to be careful we don ’ t lose that .
We must remember that it ’ s not about us or what they can do for us .
It ’ s about what we can do to bring out the best in them .
