National trends in patient safety for four common conditions , 2005-2011 .
The effects of more than a decade of national efforts dedicated to improve patient safety remain largely unclear .
This study used the Medicare Patient Safety Monitoring System ( MPSMS ) database to assess national trends in adverse event rates between 2005 through 2011 for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction , congestive heart failure , pneumonia , or conditions requiring surgery .
The analysis included a large study sample with more than 60,000 patients across 4372 hospitals .
The results show a significant decline in adverse event rates for acute myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure , translating to an estimated 81,000 in-hospital adverse events averted in 2010 – 2011 .
However , there were no measurable overall improvements for patients admitted with pneumonia or surgical conditions .
Some events , such as pressure ulcers in surgical patients , actually increased despite considerable national attention to these problems .
This study suggests that national patient safety initiatives have led to real progress in some areas but have not created across-the-board improvements .
Cross-talk between the heart and adipose tissue in cachectic heart failure patients with respect to alterations in body composition : a prospective study .
OBJECTIVES : Cardiac cachexia ( CC ) is associated with changes in body composition .
Lipolysis and increased energy expenditure caused by A- and B natriuretic peptides ( NPs ) have been suggested to play a role in CC .
We tested the hypothesis that neurohormones and adipokines are associated with body composition in CC and that a progressive loss of fat free mass ( FFM ) and fat mass ( FM ) takes place .
METHODS : Body composition with regard to FFM , FM , and body fat distribution was assessed by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry ( DXA ) in 19 non-diabetic patients with chronic heart failure ( CHF ) and CC and 38 controls ( non-cachectic CHF and individuals with prior myocardial infarction-both n = 19 ) who were followed for 12 months .
Biomarkers of neurohormonal stimulation , inflammation , and endothelial dysfunction were measured .
RESULTS : N-terminal proBNP ( NT-proBNP ) , midregional proANP ( MR-proANP ) , and total adiponectin were elevated in CHF ( p &lt; 0.001 ) and correlated inversely to BMI and FM .
An inverse correlation was observed between pro-adrenomedullin ( MR-proADM ) and FFM .
During follow up body weight was unaltered in all groups even though FM increased by 1.35 kg ( p &lt; 0.05 ) and FFM decreased by 0.5 kg ( p &lt; 0.05 ) in CC patients .
The latter correlated inversely to baseline NT-proBNP , MR-proANP , and MR-proADM ( p &lt; 0.05 ) .
No correlation to changes in FM was found .
CONCLUSIONS : FM was associated with plasma NPs and total adiponectin at baseline ; whereas changes in FM and FFM did not correlate to changes in NPs or adiponectin during follow up .
Prospectively , FFM decreased but FM increased , despite stable body weight in CC .
Diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction : role of clinical Doppler echocardiography .
In developed countries , at least 38 – 54 % of patients with heart failure show preserved left ventricular ( LV ) ejection fraction .
The prevalence of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFPEF ) is steadily increasing and its prognosis is poor .
LV diastolic dysfunction , either alone or in combination with other factors ( figure 1 ) , is the major underlying mechanism of HFPEF .
In the general population , the presence of even mild clinical diastolic dysfunction has been associated with pronounced increases in all cause mortality .
Hence , the diagnosis of clinical ( prognostic ) diastolic dysfunction leading to HFPEF is of critical importance .
The European Society of Cardiology guidelines based definition of HFPEF requires a presence of signs and symptoms of heart failure , preserved LV ejection fraction of a non-dilated left ventricle , and evidence of diastolic dysfunction ( impaired LV relaxation or increased LV diastolic stiffness ) with elevated LV filling pressures .
LV diastolic dysfunction and filling pressures can be assessed non-invasively using Doppler echocardiography .
Treatment of anemia in patients with heart disease : a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians .
Description : The American College of Physicians ( ACP ) developed this guideline to present the evidence and provide clinical recommendations on the treatment of anemia and iron deficiency in adult patients with heart disease .
Methods : This guideline is based on published literature in the English language on anemia and iron deficiency from 1947 to July 2012 that was identified using MEDLINE and the Cochrane Library .
Literature was reassessed in April 2013 , and additional studies were included .
Outcomes evaluated for this guideline included mortality ; hospitalization ; exercise tolerance ; quality of life ; and cardiovascular events ( defined as myocardial infarction , congestive heart failure exacerbation , arrhythmia , or cardiac death ) and harms , including hypertension , venous thromboembolic events , and ischemic cerebrovascular events .
The target audience for this guideline includes all clinicians , and the target patient population is anemic or iron-deficient adult patients with heart disease .
This guideline grades the evidence and recommendations using the ACP &apos;s clinical practice guidelines grading system .
Recommendation 1 : ACP recommends using a restrictive red blood cell transfusion strategy ( trigger hemoglobin threshold of 7 to 8 g / dL compared with higher hemoglobin levels ) in hospitalized patients with coronary heart disease .
( Grade : weak recommendation ; low-quality evidence ) Recommendation 2 : ACP recommends against the use of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents in patients with mild to moderate anemia and congestive heart failure or coronary heart disease .
( Grade : strong recommendation ; moderate-quality evidence ) Treatment of anemia in patients with heart disease : a systematic review .
Background : The benefits of anemia treatment in patients with heart disease are uncertain .
Purpose : To evaluate the benefits and harms of treatments for anemia in adults with heart disease .
Data Sources : MEDLINE , EMBASE , and Cochrane databases ; clinical trial registries ; reference lists ; and technical advisors .
Study Selection : English-language trials of blood transfusions , iron , or erythropoiesis-stimulating agents in adults with anemia and congestive heart failure or coronary heart disease and observational studies of transfusion .
Data Extraction : Data on study design , population characteristics , hemoglobin levels , and health outcomes were extracted .
Trials were assessed for quality .
Data Synthesis : Low-strength evidence from 6 trials and 26 observational studies suggests that liberal transfusion protocols do not improve short-term mortality rates compared with less aggressive protocols ( combined relative risk among trials , 0.94 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.61 to 1.42 &#93; ; I2 = 16.8 % ) , although decreased mortality rates occurred in a small trial of patients with the acute coronary syndrome ( 1.8 % vs. 13.0 % ; P = 0.032 ) .
Moderate-strength evidence from 3 trials of intravenous iron found improved short-term exercise tolerance and quality of life in patients with heart failure .
Moderate- to high-strength evidence from 17 trials of erythropoiesis-stimulating agent therapy found they offered no consistent benefits , but their use may be associated with harms , such as venous thromboembolism .
Limitations : Few trials have examined transfusions in patients with heart disease , and observational studies are potentially confounded by indication .
Data supporting iron use come mainly from 1 large trial , and long-term effects are unknown .
Conclusion : Higher transfusion thresholds do not consistently improve mortality rates , but large trials are needed .
Intravenous iron may help to alleviate symptoms in patients with heart failure and iron deficiency and also warrants further study .
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents do not seem to benefit patients with mild to moderate anemia and heart disease and may be associated with serious harms .
Remote ischemic conditioning for patients with heart failure ?
Management of patients with heart failure ( HF ) , stemming from ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathies , continues to be problematic , despite the inroads made in the pharmacological armamentarium , by implantable cardioverter defibrillators , cardiac resynchronization therapy , and the eventual resort to cardiac transplantation , and left and / or right ventricular assist devices .
Both patients with low left ventricular ejection fraction and patients with HF with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction are admitted to the hospital frequently and serially and keep physicians busy , in the acute and outpatient settings , for their management , also prompting them to search for better ways to deal with this worldwide epidemic and its impact on medical resources and financial costs .
Comments on &quot; the role of the emergency department in acute heart failure clinical trials-Enriching patient identification and enrollment &quot; by Collins et al .
As the authors suggest , patient categorization in the emergency department is perhaps the single most important component that is not focused on in modern acute heart failure ( AHF ) clinical studies .
However , patients with AHF are highly heterogeneous , and appropriate risk stratification is essential in conducting studies in this area .
Predictors of mortality in patients with an implantable cardiac defibrillator : a systematic review and meta-analysis .
BACKGROUND : Many current predictors of mortality in heart failure ( HF ) were evaluated before the use of implantable cardioverter defibrillators ( ICDs ) .
We conducted a meta-analysis to identify factors associated with mortality in ICD-HF patients .
METHODS : We searched in MedLine , EMBASE , and CINAHL in May 2012 .
Two reviewers selected citations that included ambulatory ICD patients and addressed the association between any predictor and mortality using multivariable regression .
We meta-analyzed mortality using random-effects models .
RESULTS : Of 10,420 studies reviewed , 72 studies evaluating 63 predictors on 257,692 ICD patients proved eligible .
High confidence in estimates was found for age ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; , 1.45 for 10-year increase ; 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; , 1.35-1.56 ) , baseline glomerular filtration rate ( HR , 1.25 for 15-mL / min decrease ; 95 % CI , 1.15-1.35 ) , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( HR , 1.54 ; 95 % CI , 1.38-1.71 ) , diabetes ( HR , 1.56 ; 95 % CI , 1.37-1.79 ) , peripheral vascular disease ( HR , 1.43 ; 95 % CI , 1.2-1.72 ) , left ventricular ejection fraction ( HR , 0.77 for 10 % increase ; 95 % CI , 0.73-0.83 ) , and appropriate or inappropriate ICD shocks ( HR , 2.34 ; 95 % CI 1.59-3.44 ) New York Heart Association class , atrial fibrillation , and congestive HF were strongly associated with mortality but the confidence in estimates was low .
Ischemic cardiomyopathy and male sex were not independent predictors of mortality .
CONCLUSIONS : This meta-analysis identified strong reliable mortality predictors in ICD-HF patients .
Age , renal dysfunction , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , diabetes , peripheral vascular disease , decreased left ventricular ejection fraction , and ICD shocks during follow-up were strong predictors of mortality ; ischemic cardiomyopathy and male sex were not .
Further research is needed to study other potential predictors , particularly biomarkers .
Low-dose dopamine or low-dose nesiritide in acute heart failure with renal dysfunction : the ROSE acute heart failure randomized trial .
IMPORTANCE : Small studies suggest that low-dose dopamine or low-dose nesiritide may enhance decongestion and preserve renal function in patients with acute heart failure and renal dysfunction ; however , neither strategy has been rigorously tested .
OBJECTIVE : To test the 2 independent hypotheses that , compared with placebo , addition of low-dose dopamine ( 2 μg / kg / min ) or low-dose nesiritide ( 0.005 μg / kg / min without bolus ) to diuretic therapy will enhance decongestion and preserve renal function in patients with acute heart failure and renal dysfunction .
DESIGN , SETTING , AND PARTICIPANTS : Multicenter , double-blind , placebo-controlled clinical trial ( Renal Optimization Strategies Evaluation &#91; ROSE &#93; ) of 360 hospitalized patients with acute heart failure and renal dysfunction ( estimated glomerular filtration rate of 15-60 mL / min / 1.73 m2 ) , randomized within 24 hours of admission .
Enrollment occurred from September 2010 to March 2013 across 26 sites in North America .
INTERVENTIONS : Participants were randomized in an open , 1 : 1 allocation ratio to the dopamine or nesiritide strategy .
Within each strategy , participants were randomized in a double-blind , 2 : 1 ratio to active treatment or placebo .
The dopamine ( n = 122 ) and nesiritide ( n = 119 ) groups were independently compared with the pooled placebo group ( n = 119 ) .
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES : Coprimary end points included 72-hour cumulative urine volume ( decongestion end point ) and the change in serum cystatin C from enrollment to 72 hours ( renal function end point ) .
RESULTS : Compared with placebo , low-dose dopamine had no significant effect on 72-hour cumulative urine volume ( dopamine , 8524 mL ; 95 % CI , 7917-9131 vs placebo , 8296 mL ; 95 % CI , 7762-8830 ; difference , 229 mL ; 95 % CI , -714 to 1171 mL ; P = .59 ) or on the change in cystatin C level ( dopamine , 0.12 mg / L ; 95 % CI , 0.06-0.18 vs placebo , 0.11 mg / L ; 95 % CI , 0.06-0.16 ; difference , 0.01 ; 95 % CI , -0.08 to 0.10 ; P = .72 ) .
Similarly , low-dose nesiritide had no significant effect on 72-hour cumulative urine volume ( nesiritide , 8574 mL ; 95 % CI , 8014-9134 vs placebo , 8296 mL ; 95 % CI , 7762-8830 ; difference , 279 mL ; 95 % CI , -618 to 1176 mL ; P = .49 ) or on the change in cystatin C level ( nesiritide , 0.07 mg / L ; 95 % CI , 0.01-0.13 vs placebo , 0.11 mg / L ; 95 % CI , 0.06-0.16 ; difference , -0.04 ; 95 % CI , -0.13 to 0.05 ; P = .36 ) .
Compared with placebo , there was no effect of low-dose dopamine or nesiritide on secondary end points reflective of decongestion , renal function , or clinical outcomes .
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE : In participants with acute heart failure and renal dysfunction , neither low-dose dopamine nor low-dose nesiritide enhanced decongestion or improved renal function when added to diuretic therapy .
Participating in a multihospital study to promote adoption of heart failure guidelines : lessons for nurse leaders .
Many multisite studies in practice settings focus on improving processes of care , adopting evidence-based practices , and improving patient outcomes .
While specific research questions may be the focus , it is the implementation issues and strategies that reveal how individuals and organizations are profoundly transformed .
Utilizing voluntary testimonies and conversations with participating nurses , the benefits of involvement in a multisite study extend beyond meeting Magnet ( ® ) research requirements .
Systems proteomics of cardiac chromatin identifies nucleolin as a regulator of growth and cellular plasticity in cardiomyocytes .
Myocyte hypertrophy antecedent to heart failure involves changes in global gene expression , although the preceding mechanisms to coordinate DNA accessibility on a genomic scale are unknown .
Chromatin-associated proteins alter chromatin structure by changing their association with DNA , thereby altering the gene expression profile .
Little is known about the global changes in chromatin subproteomes that accompany heart failure , and the mechanisms by which these proteins alter chromatin structure .
The present study tests the fundamental hypothesis that cardiac growth and plasticity in the setting of disease recapitulates conserved developmental chromatin remodeling events .
We used quantitative proteomics to identify chromatin-associated proteins extracted via detergent and to quantify changes in their abundance during disease .
Our study identified 321 proteins in this subproteome , demonstrating it to have modest conservation ( 37 % ) with that revealed using strong acid .
Of these proteins , 176 exhibited altered expression during cardiac hypertrophy and failure ; we conducted extensive functional characterization of one of these proteins , Nucleolin .
Morpholino-based knockdown of nucleolin nearly abolished protein expression but surprisingly had little impact on gross morphological development .
However , hearts of fish lacking Nucleolin displayed severe developmental impairment , abnormal chamber patterning and functional deficits , ostensibly due to defects in cardiac looping and myocyte differentiation .
The mechanisms underlying these defects involve perturbed bone morphogenetic protein 4 expression , decreased rRNA transcription , and a shift to more heterochromatic chromatin .
This study reports the quantitative analysis of a new chromatin subproteome in the normal and diseased mouse heart .
Validation studies in the complementary model system of zebrafish examine the role of Nucleolin to orchestrate genomic reprogramming events shared between development and disease .
Risk factors and outcomes associated with the development of myocardial ischemic events in patients who receive cardiac resynchronization therapy .
There are limited data regarding risk factors for the development of ischemic events ( IEs ) among patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy ( IC ) who receive cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator ( CRT-D ) and their effect on the efficacy of the device .
The present study population comprised 1,045 patients with IC enrolled in the Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial-Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy .
We used multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression modeling to identify risk factors for the development of IE ( comprising hospitalization for acute coronary syndromes and / or coronary interventions during the trial ) among study patients .
Time-dependent analysis was performed to identify the effect of IE on the risk for subsequent heart failure ( HF ) or death in CRT-D recipients .
Independent predictors for the development of IE among study patients included previous revascularization ( coronary artery bypass surgery : hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; 1.88 , p = 0.003 ; percutaneous coronary intervention : HR 3.21 , p &lt; 0.001 ) and increased systolic blood pressure ( HR 1.67 , p = 0.02 ) , whereas a left bundle branch block pattern on the baseline electrocardiogram was associated with reduced risk for IE ( HR 0.62 , p = 0.02 ) .
Treatment with CRT-D did not have a significant effect on IE risk compared with defibrillator-only therapy ( HR 0.87 , p = 0.51 ) .
Time-dependent analysis showed that the development of IEs among CRT-D recipients was associated with more than twofold ( p = 0.01 ) increased risk for subsequent heart failure or death .
In conclusion , our data suggest that treatment with CRT-D does not reduce the risk of IE in patients with IC and that the benefit of CRT-D is attenuated after the development of IEs in this population .
Age-dependent effect of left ventricular ejection fraction on long-term mortality in patients with heart failure ( from the Heart Failure Survey in ISrael ) .
Contemporary heart failure ( HF ) therapies have not resulted in improved outcomes among patients with HF and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction ( LVEF ) .
We sought to evaluate the differential effect of LVEF on long-term mortality after hospitalization for acute decompensated HF in a real-world setting .
All-cause mortality at 4 years after hospitalization for HF was assessed by LVEF ( categorized as preserved &#91; ≥ 50 % &#93; , mildly &#91; 40 % to 49 % &#93; , moderately &#91; 30 % to 39 % &#93; , and severely &#91; &lt; 30 % &#93; reduced ) among 1,620 patients enrolled in the Heart Failure Survey in ISrael .
Among the study patients , 30 % had preserved LVEF and 20 % , 25 % , and 25 % , had mild , moderate , and severe reductions in LVEF , respectively .
Multivariate analysis showed that patients with preserved LVEF had a similar risk of long-term mortality as patients with mild or moderate reduction in LVEF ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; 0.92 &#91; p = 0.40 &#93; and 1.01 &#91; p = 0.90 &#93; , respectively ) while severely reduced LVEF conferred increased increase rate compared with preserved LVEF ( HR 1.20 , p = 0.04 ) .
Interaction term analysis showed that the risk associated with severely reduced LVEF was evident only among patients ≤ 75 years ( HR 1.49 , p = 0.003 ) , whereas among older patients , there was no difference in the risk of long-term mortality between those with preserved versus severely reduced LVEF ( HR 1.02 &#91; p = 0.86 &#93; ; p value for age-by-LVEF interaction = 0.03 ) .
In conclusion , patients hospitalized for HF who have preserved LVEF experience similar long-term mortality as patients with mild or moderate reductions in LVEF , whereas severely reduced LVEF remains an independent predictor of long-term mortality in this population .
The differential effect of LVEF on long-term mortality is significantly attenuated in the older age group .
Changes in circulating progenitor cells are associated with outcome in heart failure patients : a longitudinal study .
BACKGROUND : Circulating progenitor cells ( CPCs ) are involved in the process of endothelial repair and are a prognostic factor in cardiovascular diseases .
We evaluated the association between serial measurements of CPCs and functional capacity and outcomes in heart failure ( HF ) .
METHODS : We included 156 consecutive consenting ambulatory HF patients ( left ventricular ejection fraction &lt; 40 % ) .
We evaluated CPCs and functional capacity ( peak VO2 ) every 6 months for up to 2 years .
CPCs were measured as early-outgrowth colony-forming units ( EO-CFUs ) and circulating CD34 + , VEGFR2 + and / or CD133 + cells .
We recorded mortality , HF hospital admissions , transplant , and ventricular assist device .
RESULTS : The mean age was 55 ± 15 years .
A decrease in CD34 + VEGFR2 + cells was independently associated with increased functional capacity ; a 10-cell decrease in CD34 + VEGFR2 + cells was associated with an increase of 0.2 mL / kg / min in peak VO2 ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
We found an interaction effect ( P = 0.02 ) between EO-CFUs and diabetes : in patients without diabetes , a 10-EO-CFU increase was independently associated with increased peak VO2 of 0.28 mL / kg / min ( P = 0.01 ) , and in patients with diabetes , a decrease in EO-CFUs was associated with an increased peak VO2 ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
Higher EO-CFUs were associated with reduced mortality ( hazard ratio , 0.25 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.09-0.69 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : We noted differential relations between CPCs and outcomes in patients with vs without diabetes .
Higher EO-CFUs and lower CD34 + VEGFR2 + cells were associated with improved functional capacity and reduced mortality in nondiabetic patients .
In patients with diabetes , lower EO-CFUs were associated with improved functional capacity .
The basis for these differences requires further examination .
Implications of metric choice for common applications of readmission metrics .
OBJECTIVE : To quantify the differential impact on hospital performance of three readmission metrics : all-cause readmission ( ACR ) , 3M Potential Preventable Readmission ( PPR ) , and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 30-day readmission ( CMS ) .
DATA SOURCES : 2000-2009 California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development Patient Discharge Data Nonpublic file .
STUDY DESIGN : We calculated 30-day readmission rates using three metrics , for three disease groups : heart failure ( HF ) , acute myocardial infarction ( AMI ) , and pneumonia .
Using each metric , we calculated the absolute change and correlation between performance ; the percent of hospitals remaining in extreme deciles and level of agreement ; and differences in longitudinal performance .
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS : Average hospital rates for HF patients and the CMS metric were generally higher than for other conditions and metrics .
Correlations between the ACR and CMS metrics were highest ( r = 0.67-0.84 ) .
Rates calculated using the PPR and either ACR or CMS metrics were moderately correlated ( r = 0.50-0.67 ) .
Between 47 and 75 percent of hospitals in an extreme decile according to one metric remained when using a different metric .
Correlations among metrics were modest when measuring hospital longitudinal change .
CONCLUSIONS : Different approaches to computing readmissions can produce different hospital rankings and impact pay-for-performance .
Careful consideration should be placed on readmission metric choice for these applications .
Remote monitoring after recent hospital discharge in patients with heart failure : a systematic review and network meta-analysis .
CONTEXT : Readmission to hospital for heart failure is common after recent discharge .
Remote monitoring ( RM ) strategies have the potential to deliver specialised care and management and may be one way to meet the growing needs of the heart failure population .
OBJECTIVE : To determine whether RM strategies improve outcomes for adults who have been recently discharged ( &lt; 28 days ) following an unplanned admission due to heart failure .
STUDY DESIGN : Systematic review and network meta-analysis .
DATA SOURCES : Fourteen electronic databases ( including MEDLINE , EMBASE and PsycINFO ) were searched to January 2012 , and supplemented by hand-searching relevant articles .
STUDY SELECTION : All randomised-controlled trials ( RCTs ) or observational cohort studies with a contemporaneous control group were included .
RM interventions included home telemonitoring ( TM ) ( including implanted monitoring devices ) with medical support provided during office hours or 24 / 7 and structured telephone support ( STS ) programmes delivered via human-to-human contact ( HH ) or human-to-machine interface ( HM ) .
DATA EXTRACTION : Data were extracted and validity was assessed independently by two reviewers .
RESULTS : Twenty-one RCTs that enrolled 6317 patients were identified ( 11 studies evaluated STS ( 10 of which were HH , while 1 was HM ) , 9 studies assessed TM , and 1 study assessed both STS and TM ) .
No trial of implanted monitoring devices met the inclusion criteria .
Compared with usual care , although not reaching statitistical significance , RM trended to reduce all-cause mortality for STS HH ( HR : 0.77 , 95 % credible interval ( CrI ) : 0.55 , 1.08 ) , TM during office hours ( HR : 0.76 , 95 % CrI : 0.49 , 1.18 ) and TM24 / 7 ( HR : 0.49 , 95 % CrI : 0.20 , 1.18 ) .
Exclusion of one trial that provided better-than-usual support to the control group rendered each of the above comparisons statistically significant .
No beneficial effect on mortality was observed with STS HM .
Reductions were also observed in all-cause hospitalisations for TM interventions but not for STS interventions .
Care packages generally improved health-related quality-of-life and were acceptable to patients .
CONCLUSIONS : STS HH and TM with medical support provided during office hours showed beneficial trends , particularly in reducing all-cause mortality for recently discharged patients with heart failure .
Where &apos; usual &apos; care is less good , the impact of RM is likely to be greater .
Investigation of apoptosis in a canine model of chronic heart failure induced by tachycardia .
Participation of apoptosis during the development of pacing-induced dilated cardiomyopathy is not fully understood .
After 7 weeks rapid right ventricular pacing , gene expressions of Bax , Bcl-2 and Caspase-3 were measured by RTQ-PCR from interventricular septum biopsies that were taken weekly in 21 beagle dogs during the development of heart failure .
We evaluated protein levels of these genes by Western blot and DNA fragmentation by TUNEL method from autopsy samples .
Gene expression of Bax remained unchanged during the pacing period ; Bcl-2 mRNA expression transiently decreased in moderate heart failure and their ratio ( Bcl-2 / Bax ) was not significantly altered .
Caspase-3 gene expression increased in heart failure .
Compared to the control group , expression of Bax and Bcl-2 proteins and their ratio were increased in dogs only after 4 weeks of pacing .
No band of activated Caspase was found in the normal nor in the paced myocardium .
In the TUNEL assay there was no significant difference between numbers of apoptotic cells in any of the groups , although a few TUNEL-positive cells were detected in the paced groups .
Our results are not in favour of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of heart failure in this model and may be it could be attributed to activation of other systems .
Safe , effective off-pump sternal sparing approach for HeartMate II exchange .
As left ventricular assist devices ( LVADs ) have become more widely used for treating patients with advanced heart failure , the incidence of pump dysfunction requiring pump replacement has increased .
When dysfunction is due to pump failure or driveline injury , isolated pump replacement can be curative .
We have developed a quick , safe pump-exchange technique that avoids a redo sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass .
We have used this technique to exchange malfunctioning HeartMate II LVADs in 14 consecutive patients .
The patients were extubated within 3 to 6 hours , and blood loss and transfusion requirements were nominal .
There were no periprocedural deaths or strokes .
Relationship between sex , ejection fraction , and B-type natriuretic peptide levels in patients hospitalized with heart failure and associations with inhospital outcomes : findings from the Get With The Guideline-Heart Failure Registry .
BACKGROUND : In heart failure ( HF ) , there are known differences in plasma B-type natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) levels between reduced and preserved ejection fraction ( EF ) , but few HF studies have explored sex differences .
We sought to evaluate the relationship between sex , EF , and BNP in HF patients and determine prognostic significance of BNP as it relates to sex and EF .
METHODS : We included hospitals in Get With The Guidelines-Heart Failure that admitted 99,930 HF patients with reduced ( EF &lt; 40 % ) , borderline ( EF 40 % -49 % ) , or preserved ( EF ≥ 50 % ) EF .
The primary end point was inhospital mortality .
Multivariate models were used to compute odds ratios while accounting for hospital clustering .
RESULTS : There were 47,025 patients with reduced ( 37 % female ) , 13,950 with borderline ( 48 % female ) , and 38,955 with preserved ( 65 % female ) EF .
Women compared with men had higher admission median BNP levels with the greatest difference among reduced EF and smallest difference among preserved EF ( median BNP in women vs men : EF reduced 1,259 vs 1,113 pg / mL , borderline 821 vs 732 pg / mL , and preserved 559 vs 540 pg / mL ; P &lt; .001 all comparisons ) .
Ejection fraction and sex were independently associated with BNP .
Inhospital mortality was 2.7 % , and patients above the median BNP level had higher mortality than those below .
After adjusting for over 20 clinical variables , the ability of BNP to predict inhospital mortality was similar among all subgroups ( P for heterogeneity = .47 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In a large registry , we found that despite sex / EF differences in BNP values , there was no significant difference in the ability of BNP to predict inhospital mortality among these subgroups .
Presentation , diagnosis , and medical management of heart failure in children : Canadian Cardiovascular Society guidelines .
Pediatric heart failure ( HF ) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in childhood .
This article presents guidelines for the recognition , diagnosis , and early medical management of HF in infancy , childhood , and adolescence .
The guidelines are intended to assist practitioners in office-based or emergency room practice , who encounter children with undiagnosed heart disease and symptoms of possible HF , rather than those who have already received surgical palliation .
The guidelines have been developed using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment , Development and Evaluation ( GRADE ) methodology , and are accompanied by practical Recommendations for their application in the clinical setting , supplemented by online material .
This work does not include Recommendations for advanced management involving ventricular assist devices , or other device therapies .
Heart failure and cognitive impairment : relationships with mortality .
We read the article by Dodson et al with interest .
The authors evaluated how often the nurse assessment of cognitive impairment at hospitalization was documented by the physician at the time of discharge in a cohort of elderly patients hospitalized for heart failure .
Subsequently , the authors analyzed the association of cognitive impairment with 6-month mortality or readmission .
Rates of ED visits and of intubations for congestive heart failure declined from 1996 to 2008 .
OBJECTIVE : Many advances have been made recently in the treatment of congestive heart failure ( CHF ) .
We hypothesize that this should have resulted in fewer CHF patients presenting to the emergency department ( ED ) and fewer being intubated .
DESIGN : Retrospective cohort .
SETTING : consecutive patients seen by ED physicians in 4 suburban hospitals in New Jersey and New York from 1996 to 2008 .
OBJECTIVE : PROTOCOL : We classified patients as having CHF based on International Classification of Diseases , Ninth Revision , codes .
For each year of the study , we determined CHF visit rates ( as a percentage of total ED visits ) and calculated the percentage of CHF patients intubated .
We used the Student t test , calculated 95 % confidence intervals ( CIs ) , and performed regression analyses .
RESULTS : Of the 2,374,428 ED visits , 32,036 ( 1.3 % ) were for CHF .
The mean age of the CHF patients was 76 ± 14 years , and 57 % were female .
Congestive heart failure visits declined from 1.6 % of all ED visits in 1996 to 1.2 % in 2008 , a 26 % relative decrease ( 95 % CI : 21 % -30 % , P &lt; .001 , correlation coefficient R ( 2 ) = 0.94 , P &lt; .001 ) .
Of the CHF patients , 778 ( 2.4 % ) were intubated .
Intubation rates declined from 3.6 % in 1996 to 1.7 % in 2008 , a 53 % ( 95 % CI : 31 % -68 % , P &lt; .001 , R ( 2 ) = 0.83 , P &lt; .001 ) relative decrease .
CONCLUSION : The rates of annual ED visits for CHF and intubation rates declined from 1996 to 2008 .
These decreases are most likely due to better CHF treatments .
Hemodynamic phenotype of the failing Fontan in an adult population .
Fontan failure can occur even with normal systolic ventricular function and often in the context of significant liver disease .
We hypothesized that Fontan failure is hemodynamically distinct from traditional heart failure and characterized by low systemic vascular resistance ( SVR ) index and preserved cardiac index .
Twenty-seven symptomatic adult Fontan ( SAF ) patients who underwent catheterization from 2001 to 2011 constituted our study group .
Fifty-four predominantly asymptomatic pediatric Fontan ( PF ) patients who underwent catheterization during the same period were randomly selected to perform a control : case cohort analysis .
Clinical comparisons were made between the 2 groups .
The adults were more symptomatic than the PF cohort ( New York Heart Association classes I and II or III and IV : 48 % or 52 % &#91; SAF &#93; vs 94 % or 6 % &#91; PF &#93; , respectively , p &lt; 0.01 ) .
SAF versus PF mean catheterization findings were central venous pressure 18 ± 6 versus 14 ± 3 mm Hg ( p &lt; 0.01 ) , SVR index 1,680 ± 368 versus 1,960 ± 550 dyn s / cm ( 5 ) / m ( 2 ) ( p = 0.02 ) , and cardiac index 2.7 ± 0.8 versus 2.8 ± 0.7 L / min / m ( 2 ) ( p = 0.25 ) .
By imaging , the SAF cohort demonstrated a greater incidence of abnormal liver texture changes ( 96 % vs 75 % , p = 0.04 ) and nodularity ( 77 % vs 42 % , p = 0.02 ) .
In conclusion , adult patients with failing Fontan circulation had a lower SVR index and similar cardiac index compared with the pediatric cohort .
Liver disease in the adults was more advanced .
Our data suggest that Fontan failure is a distinct circulatory derangement with hemodynamic features similar to portal hypertension , albeit with limited ability to augment cardiac output .
Comparison of predictors of heart failure-related hospitalization or death in patients with versus without preserved left ventricular ejection fraction .
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) is recognized as a major cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality .
An ability to identify patients with HFpEF who are at increased risk for adverse outcomes can facilitate their more careful management .
We studied the patients having heart failure ( HF ) using data from the Heart Failure Adherence and Retention Trial ( HART ) .
HART enrolled 902 patients in the New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) class II or III who had been recently hospitalized for HF to study the impact of self-management counseling on the primary outcome of death or HF hospitalization .
In HART , 208 patients had HFpEF and 692 had HF with reduced ejection fraction ( HFrEF ) and were followed for a median of 1,080 days .
Two final multivariate models were developed .
In patients having HFpEF , predictors of primary outcome were male gender ( odds ratio &#91; OR &#93; 3.45 , p = 0.004 ) , NYHA class III ( OR 3.05 , p = 0.008 ) , distance covered on a 6-minute walk test ( 6-MWT ) of &lt; 620 feet ( OR 2.81 , p = 0.013 ) , and &lt; 80 % adherence to prescribed medications ( OR 2.61 , p = 0.018 ) .
In patients having HFrEF , the predictors were being on diuretics ( OR 3.06 , p = 0.001 ) , having ≥ 3 co-morbidities ( OR 2.11 , p = 0.0001 ) , distance covered on a 6-MWT of &lt; 620 feet ( OR 1.94 , p = 0.001 ) , NYHA class III ( OR 1.90 , p = 0.001 ) , and age &gt; 65 years ( OR 1.63 , p = 0.01 ) .
In conclusion , indicators of functional status ( 6-MWT and NYHA class ) were common to both patients with HFpEF and those with HFrEF , whereas gender and adherence to prescribed therapy were unique to patients having HFpEF in predicting death or HF hospitalization .
Exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure promotes restoration of high-density lipoprotein functional properties .
RATIONALE : High-density lipoprotein ( HDL ) exerts endothelial-protective effects via stimulation of endothelial cell ( EC ) nitric oxide ( NO ) production .
This function is impaired in patients with cardiovascular disease .
Protective effects of exercise training ( ET ) on endothelial function have been demonstrated .
OBJECTIVE : This study was performed to evaluate the impact of ET on HDL-mediated protective effects and the respective molecular pathways in patients with chronic heart failure ( CHF ) .
METHODS AND RESULTS : HDL was isolated from 16 healthy controls ( HDL ( healthy ) ) and 16 patients with CHF-NYHA-III ( HDL ( NYHA-IIIb ) ) before and after ET , as well as from 8 patients with CHF-NYHA-II ( HDL ( NYHA-II ) ) .
ECs were incubated with HDL , and phosphorylation of eNOS-Ser ( 1177 ) , eNOS-Thr ( 495 ) , PKC-βII-Ser ( 660 ) , and p70S6K-Ser ( 411 ) was evaluated .
HDL-bound malondialdehyde and HDL-induced NO production by EC were quantified .
Endothelial function was assessed by flow-mediated dilatation .
The proteome of HDL particles was profiled by shotgun LC-MS / MS.
Incubation of EC with HDL ( NYHA-IIIb ) triggered a lower stimulation of phosphorylation at eNOS-Ser ( 1177 ) and a higher phosphorylation at eNOS-Thr ( 495 ) when compared with HDL ( healthy ) .
This was associated with lower NO production of EC .
In addition , an elevated activation of p70S6K , PKC-βII by HDL ( NYHA-IIIb ) , and a higher amount of malondialdehyde bound to HDL ( NYHA-IIIb ) compared with HDL ( healthy ) was measured .
In healthy individuals , ET had no effect on HDL function , whereas ET of CHF-NYHA-IIIb significantly improved HDL function .
A correlation between changes in HDL-induced NO production and flow-mediated dilatation improvement by ET was evident .
CONCLUSIONS : These results demonstrate that HDL function is impaired in CHF and that ET improved the HDL-mediated vascular effects .
This may be one mechanism how ET exerts beneficial effects in CHF .
Determination of a predictive cutoff value of NT-proBNP testing for long-term survival in ED patients with acute heart failure .
OBJECTIVE : The main objective of this study was to determine a predictive cutoff value for plasma N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide ( NT-proBNP ) that could successfully predict the long-term ( 4-year ) survival of patients with acute heart failure ( HF ) at the time of admission to the emergency department ( ED ) .
To our best knowledge , our study is the first research done to identify a predictive cutoff value for admission NT-proBNP to the prescriptive 4-year survival of patients admitted to ED with acute HF diagnosis .
METHODS : NT-proBNP levels were measured in plasma obtained from 99 patients with dyspnea and left ventricular dysfunction upon admission to the ED .
The end point was survival from the time of inclusion through 4 years .
RESULTS : The mean age of the patients in this study was 71.1 ± 10.3 years ; 50 of these patients were female .
During the 4-year follow-up period , 76 patients died ; survivors were significantly younger than non-survivors ( 64.26 ± 11.42 years vs 72.83 ± 11.07 years , P = .002 ) .
The optimal NT-proBNP cutoff point for predicting 4-year survival at the time of admission was 2300 pg / mL , which had 85.9 % sensitivity and 39.1 % specificity ( 95 % confidence interval , area under the curve : 0.639 , P = .044 ) .
CONCLUSION : Elevated NT-proBNP levels at the time of admission are a strong and independent predictor of all-cause mortality in patients with acute HF 4 years after admission .
Furthermore , the optimal cutoff level of NT-proBNP used to predict 4-year survival had high sensitivity .
However , especially in the case of long-term survival , additional prospective , large , and multicenter studies are required to confirm our results .
A novel heart failure mice model of hypertensive heart disease by angiotensin II infusion , nephrectomy , and salt loading .
Although the mouse heart failure ( HF ) model of hypertensive heart disease ( HHD ) is useful to investigate the pathophysiology and new therapeutic targets for HHD , the model using simple experimental procedures and stable phenotypes has not been established .
This study aimed to develop a novel mouse HF model of HHD by combining salt loading and uninephrectomy with ANG II infusion .
Eight-week-old C57BL / 6 male mice were treated with ANG II infusion ( AT ) , ANG II infusion and uninephrectomy ( AN ) , ANG II infusion and salt loading ( AS ) , or ANG II infusion , uninephrectomy , and salt loading ( ANS ) .
Systolic blood pressure was significantly elevated and left ventricular ( LV ) hypertrophy was found in AT , AN , AS , and ANS mice , and there were no significant differences in those parameters between the four groups .
At 6 wk after the procedures , only ANS mice showed significant decreases in LV fractional shortening and increases in lung weight with a high incidence .
This phenotype was reproducible , and there were few perioperative or early deaths in the experimental procedures .
Severe LV fibrosis was found in ANS mice .
Oxidative stress was enhanced and small GTPase Rac1 activity was upregulated in the hearts of ANS mice .
After the addition of salt loading and uninephrectomy to the ANG II infusion mouse model , cardiac function was significantly impaired , and mice developed HF .
This might be a novel and useful mouse HF model to study the transition from compensated LV hypertrophy to HF in HHD .
Troponin T and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide : a biomarker approach to predict heart failure risk--the atherosclerosis risk in communities study .
BACKGROUND : Among the various cardiovascular diseases , heart failure ( HF ) is projected to have the largest increases in incidence over the coming decades ; therefore , improving HF prediction is of significant value .
We evaluated whether cardiac troponin T ( cTnT ) measured with a high-sensitivity assay and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide ( NT-proBNP ) , biomarkers strongly associated with incident HF , improve HF risk prediction in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities ( ARIC ) study .
METHODS : Using sex-specific models , we added cTnT and NT-proBNP to age and race ( &quot; laboratory report &quot; model ) and to the ARIC HF model ( includes age , race , systolic blood pressure , antihypertensive medication use , current / former smoking , diabetes , body mass index , prevalent coronary heart disease , and heart rate ) in 9868 participants without prevalent HF ; area under the receiver operating characteristic curve ( AUC ) , integrated discrimination improvement , net reclassification improvement ( NRI ) , and model fit were described .
RESULTS : Over a mean follow-up of 10.4 years , 970 participants developed incident HF .
Adding cTnT and NT-proBNP to the ARIC HF model significantly improved all statistical parameters ( AUCs increased by 0.040 and 0.057 ; the continuous NRIs were 50.7 % and 54.7 % in women and men , respectively ) .
Interestingly , the simpler laboratory report model was statistically no different than the ARIC HF model .
CONCLUSIONS : cTnT and NT-proBNP have significant value in HF risk prediction .
A simple sex-specific model that includes age , race , cTnT , and NT-proBNP ( which can be incorporated in a laboratory report ) provides a good model , whereas adding cTnT and NT-proBNP to clinical characteristics results in an excellent HF prediction model .
Survival after left ventricular assist device with and without temporary right ventricular support .
BACKGROUND : Right ventricular ( RV ) failure after the insertion of a left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) historically results in poor outcomes .
Patients requiring temporary RV support after LVAD insertion are a heterogeneous group of patients consisting of those in cardiogenic shock after myocardial infarction , to those with chronic decompensated heart failure .
For patients requiring biventricular support , we have used a hybrid system consisting of a HeartMate II LVAD and CentriMag right ventricular assist device ( RVAD ) .
The purpose of this study was to determine the 1-year survival in patients requiring isolated LVAD and patients requiring biventricular support .
METHODS : All patients who underwent HeartMate II LVAD alone or in conjunction with a temporary CentriMag RVAD were examined from 2006 to 2011 .
Preoperative demographics , operative outcomes , and survival were analyzed .
RESULTS : A total of 139 patients required HeartMate II insertion ; 34 ( 24 % ) required biventricular support at the time of HeartMate II implantation .
The mean duration of biventricular support was 17 ± 11.9 days ( range , 6 to 56 days ) with 91.8 % ( n = 31 ) of RVADs successfully explanted .
Survival to hospital discharge was not different between groups ( 95.2 versus 88.2 % ; p = 0.2 ) .
However , 1-year survival was significantly greater in patients who required isolated HeartMate II LVAD ( 87 % versus 77 % ; p = 0.03 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Biventricular support using a HeartMate II LVAD and CentriMag RVAD resulted in limited mortality at hospital discharge .
However biventricular dysfunction does not have a favorable outcome at 1 year when compared with patients requiring isolated HeartMate II .
Should eligibility for heart transplantation be a requirement for left ventricular assist device use ?
Recommendations based on a systematic review .
Left ventricular assist devices ( LVADs ) are used in chronic end-stage heart failure as &quot; bridge to transplantation &quot; ( BTT ) and , more recently , for transplant-ineligible patients as &quot; destination therapy &quot; ( DT ) .
We reviewed the evidence on clinical effects and cost-effectiveness of 2 types of continuous-flow LVADs ( HeartMate II &#91; HM II &#93; and HeartWare ) , for BTT and DT patients .
We systematically searched the scientific literature ( January 2008-June 2012 ) and identified 14 clinical studies ( approximately 2900 HM II and approximately 200 HeartWare patients ) , and 3 economic evaluations ( HM II ) using simulation models .
Data were , however , limited to 2-3 studies per outcome .
We made policy recommendations on the basis of our systematic review .
Although complications after implantation are frequent , LVAD therapy is often highly effective across transplantation eligibility status and device , with 1-year survival reaching 86 % for BTT and 78 % for DT ( compared with 25 % for medical therapy ) .
Neither BTT nor DT currently meet traditional cost-effectiveness limits in models using historical data , although BTT is standard practice for a limited number of patients in many regions .
We found that BTT and DT as implantation strategies tend to be no longer mutually exclusive .
We conclude that evidence is sufficient to support LVAD use , regardless of transplantation eligibility status , as long as patients are carefully selected and program infrastructure and budget are adequate .
However , evidence gaps , limitations in economic models , and the lack of Canadian data point to the importance of mandatory , systematic monitoring of LVAD use and outcomes .
Effects of biventricular pacing on left heart twist and strain in a porcine model of right heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Biventricular pacing ( BiVP ) improves cardiac output ( CO ) in selected cardiac surgery patients , but response remains variable , necessitating a better understanding of the mechanism .
Accordingly , we used speckle tracking echocardiography ( STE ) to analyze BiVP during acute right ventricular pressure overload ( RVPO ) .
MATERIALS AND METHODS : In nine pigs , the inferior vena cava ( IVC ) was snared to decrease CO and establish a control model .
Heart block was induced , the pulmonary artery snared , and BiVP initiated .
Echocardiograms of the left ventricular midpapillary level were taken at varying atrioventricular delay ( AVD ) and interventricular delay ( VVD ) for STE analysis of regional circumferential strain ( CS ) and radial strain ( RS ) .
Echocardiograms were taken of the left ventricular base , midpapillary , and apex during baseline , IVC occlusion , and each BiVP setting for STE analysis of twist , apical and basal rotations , CS , RS , and synchrony .
Indices were correlated against CO with mixed linear models .
RESULTS : During IVC occlusion , CO correlated with twist , apical rotation , RS , RS synchrony , and CS ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
During RVPO with BiVP , CO only correlated with RS synchrony and CS ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
During AVD and VVD variations , CO was associated with free wall RS ( P &lt; 0.008 ) .
CO correlated with septal wall CS during AVD variation and free wall CS during VVD variation ( P &lt; 0.008 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In an open chest model , twist , RS , RS synchrony , and CS analyzed by STE may be noninvasive surrogates for changes in CO . During RVPO , changes in RS synchrony and CS with varying regional strain contributions may be the primary mechanism in which BiVP improves CO .
Lack of correlation of remaining indices may reflect postsystolic function .
Mitral stenosis reversed by medical treatment for heart failure .
It is reported that functional mitral stenosis frequently develops after ring annuloplasty for ischemic mitral regurgitation .
The mechanism is a combination of annular size reduction by surgery and diastolic mitral valve tethering , restricting the anterior leaflet opening due to posteriorly displaced papillary muscles with left ventricular dilatation .
We report the case of a 57-year-old man who had a history of successful mitral valve plasty for degenerative mitral regurgitation .
Four years later he developed heart failure , severe hypertension , mild mitral regurgitation , and significant mitral stenosis , which were reversed by aggressive medical treatment for heart failure .
Functional mitral stenosis ( MS ) frequently develops after ring annuloplasty for ischemic mitral regurgitation ( MR ) .
The mechanism is a combination of annular size reduction by surgery and diastolic mitral valve tethering , restricting the anterior leaflet opening due to posteriorly displaced papillary muscles with left ventricular ( LV ) dilatation .
Functional MS has not been reported in patients with degenerative MR.
However , functional MS could develop even in patients with a history of successful valve plasty and annular size reduction for degenerative MR if the LV were dilated by another disease .
In addition , because functional MS is dynamic and proportional to LV dilatation , treatment for heart failure ( HF ) , acting to reduce the LV size , can potentially improve such functional MS. A 52-year-old man had HF with severe MR due to prolapse of a degenerative mitral valve in 2008 .
He had grade 4 / 6 holosystolic murmur and a third heart sound in the apex .
His blood pressure was 120 / 70 mm Hg , he underwent mitral valve plasty for degenerative MR , he had P3 prolapse with 2 chordal ruptures and he underwent triangular resection , edge-to-edge anastomosis , and ring annuloplasty with a Physio Ring 30 ( Edwards Lifesciences , Irvine , CA ) of just size .
After the surgery , HF disappeared and postoperative echocardiography confirmed a normal sized LV with an end-diastolic volume index of 71 mL / m2 , normal LV ejection fraction of 0.70 , no MR and preserved mitral valve opening with a mitral valve area ( MVA ) of 1.8 cm2 , and a mean pressure gradient of 4.4 mm Hg ( Fig 1A ) .
The MVA was obtained by a continuity equation ( LV end-diastolic volume − LV end-systolic volume = mitral filling flow volume = MVA × velocity time integral of mitral filling flow by continuous wave Doppler echocardiography ) , which can be utilized even in the presence of MR. His mitral valve plasty was successfully performed without major concerns .
He developed HF again 4 years later .
This time , he had severe hypertension of 191 / 104 mm Hg , diabetes mellitus , and grade 2 to 3 / 6 systolic as well as diastolic murmurs were audible at the apex .
Echocardiography demonstrated moderately dilated LV with an end-diastolic volume index of 84 mL / m2 , reduced LV ejection fraction of 0.40 , mild MR , and limited mitral valve opening , resulting in a significant MS with an MVA of 1.2 cm2 and a mean pressure gradient of 8.4 mm Hg ( Fig 1B ) .
Coronary angiography revealed no significant lesions in the major branches .
The patient was diagnosed as hypertensive LV dysfunction with mild MR and significant MS.
Both systolic and diastolic mitral leaflet motions were restricted without any clear organic lesion .
The etiology of the MR and MS was diagnosed as functional .
As significant MS was associated with HF , surgical indication for MS was discussed .
The possibility of MS to improve after medical treatment for HF was considered because functional MS is highly dynamic and can potentially respond to medical treatment .
Consequently , surgery was not performed and aggressive medical treatment for HF and hypertension with vasodilators and diuretics was started .
His HF symptom as well as cardiac murmurs disappeared with a reduction in blood pressure to 140 / 80 mm Hg .
Repeated echocardiography 4 months later demonstrated a reduction in LV end-diastolic volume of 66 mL / m2 , disappearance of MR , improvement of the mitral valve opening to an MVA of 1.7 cm2 , and a mean pressure gradient of 4.6 mm Hg ( Fig 1C ) .
In this patient there was no MS before the surgery by echocardiography .
Direct observation at the time of surgery also confirmed no findings of rheumatic or other causes of MS. After the surgery , MVA was reduced but only modestly .
Possible reasons for the modest reduction in MVA could be annular size reduction by the surgical ring implantation and mild restriction of leaflet motion by the leaflet resection and edge-to-edge anastomosis .
However , the degree of MS early after surgery was not significant , with an MVA of 1.8 cm2 .
Mitral regurgitation as well as HF symptoms disappeared after the surgery .
Therefore , the surgery was successful .
However , this patient developed HF 4 years later .
At this time , he had severe hypertension , moderate LV dilatation , LV dysfunction , mild MR , and significant MS. As the mitral valve demonstrated restricted closure and opening without any clear organic lesion , being consistent with systolic and diastolic tethering , a functional etiology of MR and MS was considered .
There have been reports demonstrating development of functional MS following ring annuloplasty for ischemic MR with LV dilatation .
This patient showed that functional MS could develop even in a patient with successful valve plasty for degenerative MR , if the LV is dilated by another disease .
Because functional MS is dynamic and proportional to LV dilatation , the degree of functional MS can potentially vary considerably .
At the time of second HF 4 years after valve plasty , MS was significant with an MVA of 1.2 cm2 .
According to the guideline , the MS at that time could be considered indicative for surgery .
After aggressive medical treatment for HF , the HF symptom disappeared and the MS was reversed to an MVA of 1.7 cm2 .
At this point , insignificant MS can be considered as not indicative for surgery .
Therefore , the surgical indications need to be carefully evaluated in patients with functional MS.
In addition to the leaflet configurations , the serial evaluation strongly suggested that the MS in this patient was subvalvular and therefore dynamic , as opposed to annular MS with a fixed ring size .
This case report demonstrates that functional MS could develop even in a patient with a history of successful valve plasty for degenerative MR , if the LV is dilated by another disease .
Functional MS can potentially be reversed by medical treatment and thus requires careful evaluation of the surgical indications .
Risk stratification for death and all-cause hospitalization in heart failure clinic outpatients .
BACKGROUND : Most heart failure ( HF ) risk stratification models were developed for inpatient use , and available outpatient models use a complex set of variables .
We hypothesized that routinely collected clinical data could predict the 6-month risk of death and all-cause medical hospitalization in HF clinic outpatients .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Using a quality improvement database and multivariable Cox modeling , we derived the Heart Failure Patient Severity Index ( HFPSI ) in the University of Michigan HF clinic ( UM cohort , n = 1,536 ; 314 reached primary outcome ) .
We externally validated the HFPSI in the Ann Arbor Veterans &apos; Affairs HF clinic ( VA cohort , n = 445 ; 106 outcomes ) and explored &quot; real-time &quot; HFPSI use ( VA-RT cohort , n = 486 ; 141 outcomes ) by tracking VA patients for 6 months from their most recently calculated HFPSI , rather than using an arbitrary start date for the cohort .
The HFPSI model included blood urea nitrogen , B-type natriuretic peptide , New York Heart Association class , diabetes status , history of atrial fibrillation / flutter , and all-cause hospitalization within the prior 1 and 2 to 6 months .
The concordance c statistics in the UM / VA / VA-RT cohorts were 0.71 / 0.68 / 0.74 .
Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank testing demonstrated excellent risk stratification , particularly between a large , low-risk group ( 40 % of patients , 6-month event rates in the UM / VA / VA-RT cohorts 8 % / 12 % / 12 % ) and a small , high-risk group ( 10 % of patients , 6-month event rates in the UM / VA / VA-RT cohorts 57 % / 58 % / 79 % ) .
CONCLUSIONS : The HFPSI uses readily available data to predict the 6-month risk of death and / or all-cause medical hospitalization in HF clinic outpatients and could potentially help allocate specialized HF resources within health systems .
Incidence and predictors of end-stage renal disease in outpatients with systolic heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Renal dysfunction is an important prognostic factor in heart failure ( HF ) , but whether this dysfunction progresses to end-stage renal disease ( ESRD ) is unknown .
Therefore , we examined incidence and predictors of ESRD in outpatients with HF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Patients with systolic HF were identified in The Danish Heart Failure database and new-onset ESRD from the Danish Registry on Dialysis .
Renal function was estimated by The Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration equation and patients grouped by estimated glomerular filtration rate ( eGFR ) -group I : ≥ 60 mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) , group II : 30 to 59 mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) , group III : 15 to 29 mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) , group IV : &lt; 15 mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) .
Cox hazard models for time to ESRD , to death , and the composite end point of ESRD or death were constructed and predictors of ESRD identified .
A total of 8204 patients were included in the analyses .
Median age was 70 years ( Q , 61-77 ) , 28 % were women , median left ventricular ejection fraction was 30 % ( Q , 24-40 ) , and median eGFR was 68 ( Q , 51-85 ) mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) .
Forty-one patients developed ESRD ( 1.3 / 1000 patient-years ) .
Baseline eGFR group II ( P &lt; 0.001 ) , eGFR group III ( P &lt; 0.001 ) , eGFR group IV ( P &lt; 0.001 ) , uncontrolled hypertension ( P = 0.049 ) , need of diuretics , and age &lt; 60 years ( P = 0.016 ) were associated with time to ESRD .
CONCLUSIONS : ESRD is rare in outpatients with systolic HF and is mainly observed in patients with an eGFR &lt; 30 mL / min per 1.73 m ( 2 ) .
A low eGFR , age &lt; 60 years , need of diuretics , and uncontrolled hypertension identify patients with an increased risk for ESRD .
Comparable performance of the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire in patients with heart failure with preserved and reduced ejection fraction .
BACKGROUND : Despite the growing epidemic of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) , no valid measure of patients &apos; health status ( symptoms , function , and quality of life ) exists .
We evaluated the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire ( KCCQ ) , a validated measure of HF with reduced EF , in patients with HFpEF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Using a prospective HF registry , we dichotomized patients into HF with reduced EF ( EF ≤ 40 ) and HFpEF ( EF ≥ 50 ) .
The associations between New York Heart Association class , a commonly used criterion standard , and KCCQ Overall Summary and Total Symptom domains were evaluated using Spearman correlations and 2-way ANOVA with differences between patients with HF with reduced EF and HFpEF tested with interaction terms .
Predictive validity of the KCCQ Overall Summary scores was assessed with Kaplan-Meier curves for death and all-cause hospitalization .
Covariate adjustment was made using Cox proportional hazards models .
Internal reliability was assessed with Cronbach &apos;s α .
Among 849 patients , 200 ( 24 % ) had HFpEF .
KCCQ summary scores were strongly associated with New York Heart Association class in both patients with HFpEF ( r = -0.62 ; P &lt; 0.001 ) and HF with reduced EF ( r = -0.55 ; P = 0.27 for interaction ) .
One-year event-free rates by KCCQ category among patients with HFpEF were 0 to 25 = 13.8 % , 26 to 50 = 59.1 % , 51 to 75 = 73.8 % , and 76 to 100 = 77.8 % ( log rank P &lt; 0.001 ) , with no significant interaction by EF ( P = 0.37 ) .
The KCCQ domains demonstrated high internal consistency among patients with HFpEF ( Cronbach &apos;s α = 0.96 for overall summary and ≥ 0.69 in all subdomains ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Among patients with HFpEF , the KCCQ seems to be a valid and reliable measure of health status and offers excellent prognostic ability .
Future studies should extend and replicate our findings , including the establishment of its responsiveness to clinical change .
Soluble concentrations of the interleukin receptor family member ST2 and beta-blocker therapy in chronic heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Concentrations of soluble ( s ) ST2 predict prognosis in heart failure .
We recently found changing doses of β-blocker ( BB ) may affect sST2 concentrations .
It remains unclear whether sST2 concentrations identify benefit of BB therapy , however .
METHODS AND RESULTS : A total of 151 subjects with heart failure attributable to left ventricular systolic dysfunction were examined in this post hoc analysis ; &gt; 96 % were taking BB at enrollment .
Medication regimen and sST2 values were obtained during 10 months .
Cardiovascular events were examined as a function of baseline sST2 status ( low ≤ 35 versus high &gt; 35 ng / mL ) and final achieved BB dose ( high ≥ 50 versus low &lt; 50 mg daily equivalent dose of metoprolol succinate ) .
Patients with low sST2 titrated to high-dose BB had the lowest cardiovascular event rate at 0.53 events ( P = 0.001 ) , and lowest cumulative hazard ( P = 0.003 ) .
Those with low sST2 / low-dose BB , or high sST2 / high-dose BB had intermediate outcomes ( 0.92 and 1.19 events ) .
Patients with high sST2 treated with low-dose BB had the highest cardiovascular event rate ( 2.08 events ) and the highest cumulative hazard .
Compared with low sST2 / high-dose BB , those with high sST2 treated with low-dose BB had an odds ratio of 6.77 ( P &lt; 0.001 ) for a cardiovascular event .
Patients with low sST2 / low-dose BB or high sST2 / high-dose BB had intermediate odds ratios for cardiovascular events ( P = 0.18 and 0.02 ) .
Similar results were found for heart failure hospitalization and cardiovascular death .
CONCLUSIONS : Although BB therapy exerted dose-related benefits across all study participants , sST2 measurement identifies patients with chronic heart failure who may particularly benefit from higher BB doses .
Echocardiographic predictors of reverse remodeling after cardiac resynchronization therapy and subsequent events .
BACKGROUND : Studies of echocardiographic predictors of response after cardiac resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) have largely involved single parameters .
We hypothesized that combining parameters would be more robust and sought to develop a multiparametric echocardiographic score for predicting CRT response .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Global longitudinal strain of left ventricle was added to standard echocardiographic measurements in 334 consecutive patients ( 224 men ; mean , 65 ± 12 years ) who underwent baseline echocardiography before CRT and underwent follow-up echocardiograms at 1 year .
Regression analysis was performed to create an echocardiographic score for prediction of LV reverse remodeling ( defined as ≥ 15 % reduction in the LV end-systolic volume ) .
Cox proportional hazards models were used to identify the association of the score with death , transplantation or LV assist device implantation , and heart failure hospitalization during 57 ± 22 months of follow-up .
LV reverse remodeling ( n = 161 ; 48 % ) was associated with pre-CRT LV end-diastolic dimension index &lt; 3.1 cm / m ( 2 ) , global longitudinal strain of left ventricle &lt; -7 % , left atrial area &lt; 26 cm ( 2 ) , right ventricular end-diastolic area index &lt; 10.0 cm ( 2 ) / m ( 2 ) , right atrial area &lt; 20 cm ( 2 ) , and right ventricular fractional area change ≥ 35 % .
Combination of these into an echocardiographic score allowed prediction of LV reverse remodeling with a sensitivity of 84 % and a specificity of 79 % .
During follow-up , there were 134 deaths , 18 heart transplantations / LV assist device implantations , and 93 heart failure admissions .
The score was associated with heart failure admission , heart transplantation / LV assist device , or death ( hazard ratio , 0.97 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.95-0.98 ; P &lt; 0.001 ) and all-cause death ( hazard ratio , 0.97 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.96-0.98 ; P &lt; 0.001 ) , independent of age , sex , ischemic cause , and initial functional class .
CONCLUSIONS : A multiparametric echocardiographic score is helpful in selecting patients likely to undergo reverse remodeling after CRT and predicts clinical outcomes .
Effectiveness and safety of spironolactone for systolic heart failure .
Aldosterone receptor antagonists have been shown in randomized trials to reduce morbidity and mortality in adults with symptomatic systolic heart failure .
We studied the effectiveness and safety of spironolactone in adults with newly diagnosed systolic heart failure in clinical practice .
We identified all adults with newly diagnosed heart failure , left ventricular ejection fraction of &lt; 40 % , and no previous spironolactone use from 2006 to 2008 in Kaiser Permanente Northern California .
We excluded patients with baseline serum creatinine level of &gt; 2.5 mg / dl or a serum potassium level of &gt; 5.0 mEq / L.
We used Cox regression with time-varying covariates to evaluate the independent association between spironolactone use and death , hospitalization , severe hyperkalemia , and acute kidney injury .
Among 2,538 eligible patients with a median follow-up of 2.5 years , 521 patients ( 22 % ) initiated spironolactone , which was not associated with risk of hospitalization ( adjusted hazard ratio 0.91 , 95 % confidence interval 0.77 to 1.08 ) or death ( adjusted hazard ratio 0.93 , confidence interval 0.60 to 1.44 ) .
Crude rates of severe hyperkalemia and acute kidney injury during spironolactone use were similar to that seen in clinical trials .
Spironolactone was independently associated with a 3.5-fold increased risk of hyperkalemia but not with acute kidney injury .
Within a diverse community-based cohort with incident systolic heart failure , use of spironolactone was not independently associated with risks of hospitalization or death .
Our findings suggest that the benefits of spironolactone in clinical practice may be reduced compared with other guideline-recommended medications .
Vascular endothelial growth factor blockade prevents the beneficial effects of beta-blocker therapy on cardiac function , angiogenesis , and remodeling in heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Impaired angiogenesis in the post-myocardial infarction heart contributes to the progression to heart failure .
The inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) signaling has been shown to be crucial for the transition from compensatory hypertrophy to cardiac failure .
Importantly , β-adrenergic receptor blocker therapy has been also shown to improve myocardial perfusion by enhancing neoangiogenesis in the failing heart .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Eight weeks from surgically induced myocardial infarction , heart failure rats were randomized to receive bisoprolol ( B ) or vehicle .
At the end of a 10-week treatment period , echocardiography revealed reduced cardiac diameters and improved cardiac function in B-treated compared with vehicle-treated rats .
Moreover , B treatment was associated with increased cardiac angiogenesis and in vivo coronary perfusion and reduced cardiac fibrosis .
Importantly , 2 weeks after B treatment was started , increased cardiac VEGF expression and Akt and endothelial NO synthase activation were observed by comparing B-treated with drug-untreated failing hearts .
To test whether the proangiogenic effects of B act via activation of VEGF pathway , rats were intravenously injected with adenoviral vector encoding a decoy VEGF receptor ( Ad-Flk ) or a control adenovirus ( Ad-C ) , at the start of the treatment with B.
After 10 weeks , histological analysis revealed reduced capillary and coronary perfusion in B-treated plus Ad-Flk rats compared with B-treated plus Ad-C rats .
Moreover , VEGF inhibition counteracted the positive effects of B on cardiac function and remodeling .
CONCLUSIONS : β-Blockade promotes cardiac angiogenesis in heart failure via activation of VEGF signaling pathway .
β-Blocker-induced enhancement of cardiac angiogenesis is essential for the favorable effects of this therapy on cardiac function and remodeling .
Do outcomes for patients with heart failure vary by emergency department volume ?
Background — Heart failure is a common Emergency Department ( ED ) presentation but whether ED volume influences patient outcomes is unknown .
Methods and Results — Retrospective cohort of all adults presenting to 93 EDs between 1999 and 2009 with a most responsible diagnosis of heart failure ( n = 44 925 ED visits ; mean age , 76.4 years ) .
Cases seen in low-volume EDs had less comorbidities and were less likely to be hospitalized ( 54.5 % ) than those seen in medium ( 61.8 % ; adjusted odds ratio &#91; aOR &#93; 1.16 , &#91; 95 % confidence interval { CI } 1.10 – 1.23 &#93; ) or high-volume EDs ( 73.6 % ; aOR , 1.95 &#91; 95 % CI , 1.83 – 2.07 &#93; ) .
Of patients treated and released , low-volume ED cases exhibited higher risk of death / hospitalization / ED visit in the subsequent 7 ( 22.0 % ) and 30 days ( 44.9 % ) than medium ( 16.3 % ; aOR , 0.81 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.73 – 0.90 &#93; , and 35.3 % ; aOR , 0.79 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.73 – 0.86 &#93; ) or high-volume ED cases ( 13.0 % ; aOR , 0.69 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.61 – 0.78 &#93; , and 30.2 % ; aOR , 0.67 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.61 – 0.74 &#93; ) .
Of patients hospitalized at the time of their index ED visit , low-volume ED cases exhibited a higher risk of 30-day death / all-cause readmission ( 24.3 % ) than those seen in medium ( 21.9 % ; aOR , 0.83 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.76 – 0.91 &#93; ) or high-volume EDs ( 18.1 % ; aOR , 0.77 &#91; 95 % CI , 0.70 – 0.85 &#93; ) .
Conclusions — Low-volume EDs were more likely to discharge patients with heart failure home , but low-volume ED cases exhibited worse outcomes ( driven largely by readmissions or repeat ED visits ) .
Interventions to improve management of acute heart failure are required at low-volume sites .
Xanthine oxidase inhibition preserves left ventricular systolic but not diastolic function in cardiac volume overload .
Xanthine oxidase ( XO ) is increased in human and rat left ventricular ( LV ) myocytes with volume overload ( VO ) of mitral regurgitation and aortocaval fistula ( ACF ) .
In the setting of increased ATP demand , XO-mediated ROS can decrease mitochondrial respiration and contractile function .
Thus , we tested the hypothesis that XO inhibition improves cardiomyocyte bioenergetics and LV function in chronic ACF in the rat .
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomized to either sham or ACF ± allopurinol ( 100 mg · kg ( -1 ) · day ( -1 ) , n ≥ 7 rats / group ) .
Echocardiography at 8 wk demonstrated a similar 37 % increase in LV end-diastolic dimension ( P &lt; 0.001 ) , a twofold increase in LV end-diastolic pressure / wall stress ( P &lt; 0.05 ) , and a twofold increase in lung weight ( P &lt; 0.05 ) in treated and untreated ACF groups versus the sham group .
LV ejection fraction , velocity of circumferential shortening , maximal systolic elastance , and contractile efficiency were significantly depressed in ACF and significantly improved in ACF + allopurinol rats , all of which occurred in the absence of changes in the maximum O2 consumption rate measured in isolated cardiomyocytes using the extracellular flux analyzer .
However , the improvement in contractile function is not paralleled by any attenuation in LV dilatation , LV end-diastolic pressure / wall stress , and lung weight .
In conclusion , allopurinol improves LV contractile function and efficiency possibly by diminishing the known XO-mediated ROS effects on myofilament Ca ( 2 + ) sensitivity .
However , LV remodeling and diastolic properties are not improved , which may explain the failure of XO inhibition to improve symptoms and hospitalizations in patients with severe heart failure .
Usefulness of tissue Doppler imaging for assessing left ventricular filling pressure in patients with stable severe systolic heart failure .
The ratio of early transmitral blood flow velocity over tissue Doppler early diastolic mitral annulus velocity ( E / e &apos; ) was found unreliable for estimating pulmonary capillary wedge pressure ( PCWP ) in patients with decompensated systolic heart failure ( HF ) .
The objective of this study was to test its reliability in stable HF .
Therefore , 130 consecutive patients with a left ventricular ( LV ) ejection fraction of &lt; 35 % and stable HF underwent right-sided cardiac catheterization and transthoracic echocardiography with measurement of transmitral flow velocities ( E , A ) and mitral annulus velocities during systole ( s &apos; ) and diastole ( e &apos; ) .
Mean age was 56 ± 11 years and mean LV ejection fraction was 28 ± 8 % ; 48 % had PCWP of &gt; 15 mm Hg .
E / e &apos;septal correlated more strongly with PCWP ( r = 0.53 ) compared with E / e &apos;lateral ( r = 0.41 ) and E / e &apos;mean ( r = 0.50 ; all p values &lt; 0.001 ) .
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve ( AUC ) of E / e &apos; ratios for PCWP estimation was 0.79 ( 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; 0.70 to 0.87 ) for E / e &apos;septal , 0.72 ( 95 % CI 0.63 to 0.82 ) for E / elateral , and 0.79 ( 95 % CI 0.70 to 0.87 ) for E / emean ( all p values &lt; 0.0001 ) .
AUCs of E / eseptal and E / emean did not vary with s &apos;septal , QRS width , or resynchronization .
Using a cutoff of 8 , negative predictive value of E / e &apos;septal was 89 % and negative likelihood ratio of 0.15 .
E / e &apos;lateral showed good diagnostic performance only in patients with s &apos;lateral of &gt; 4.5 cm / s ( n = 77 , 59 % ; AUC = 0.82 ; 95 % CI 0.71 to 0.92 ; s &apos;lateral of ≤ 4.5 cm / s : AUC = 0.54 ; 95 % CI 0.38 to 0.70 ; p = 0.005 ) .
In conclusion , e &apos; is useful for estimating LV filling pressure in stable severe systolic HF .
E / e &apos;septal showed good diagnostic performance for detecting normal filling pressures .
Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and pulmonary arterial systolic pressure relationship in heart failure : an index of right ventricular contractile function and prognosis .
Abstract Echo-derived pulmonary arterial systolic pressure ( PASP ) and right ventricular ( RV ) tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion ( TAPSE ; from the end of diastole to end-systole ) are of basic relevance in the clinical follow-up of heart failure ( HF ) patients , carrying two- to threefold increase in cardiac risk when increased and reduced , respectively .
We hypothesized that the relationship between TAPSE ( longitudinal RV fiber shortening ) and PASP ( force generated by the RV ) provides an index of in vivo RV length-force relationship , with their ratio better disclosing prognosis .
Two hundred ninety-three HF patients with reduced ( HFrEF , n = 247 ) or with preserved left ventricular ( LV ) ejection fraction ( HFpEF , n = 46 ) underwent echo-Doppler studies and N-terminal pro-brain-type natriuretic peptide assessment and were tracked for adverse events .
The median follow-up duration was 20.8 mo .
TAPSE vs. PASP relationship showed a downward regression line shift in nonsurvivors who were more frequently presenting with higher PASP and lower TAPSE .
HFrEF and HFpEF patients exhibited a similar distribution along the regression line .
Given the TAPSE , PASP , and TAPSE-to-PASP ratio ( TAPSE / PASP ) collinearity , separate Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses were performed : one with TAPSE and PASP as individual measures , and the other combining them in ratio form .
Hazard ratios for variables retained in the multivariate regression were as follows : TAPSE / PASP &lt; / ≥ 0.36 mm / mmHg &#91; hazard ratio ( HR ) : 10.4 , P &lt; 0.001 &#93; ; TAPSE &lt; / ≥ 16 mm ( HR : 5.1 , P &lt; 0.01 ) ; New York Heart Association functional class &lt; / ≥ 3 ( HR : 4.4 , P &lt; 0.001 ) ; E / e &apos; ( HR : 4.1 , P &lt; 0.001 ) .
This study shows that the TAPSE vs. PASP relationship is shifted downward in nonsurvivors with a similar distribution in HFrEF and HFpEF , and their ratio improves prognostic resolution .
The TAPSE vs. PASP relationship as a possible index of the length-force relationship may be a step forward for a more efficient RV function evaluation and is not affected by the quality of LV dysfunction .
The bottleneck stent model for chronic myocardial ischemia and heart failure in pigs .
A large animal model of chronic myocardial ischemia and heart failure is crucial for the development of novel therapeutic approaches .
In this study we developed a novel percutaneous one- and two-vessel model for chronic myocardial ischemia using a stent coated with a polytetrafluoroethylene tube formed in a bottleneck shape .
The bottleneck stent was implanted in the proximal left anterior descending ( LAD ) or proximal circumflex artery ( LCX ) , or in both proximal LCX and mid LAD 1 wk later ( 2-vessel model ) , and pigs were followed for 4-5 wk .
Ejection fraction ( EF ) , infarct size , collateral growth , and myocardial perfusion were assessed .
Pigs were given antiarrhythmic medication to prevent sudden death .
The occlusion time of the bottleneck stent and the timing of myocardial infarction could be modulated by the duration of antiplatelet medication .
Fractional flow reserve measurements and positron emission tomography imaging showed severe ischemia after bottleneck stenting covering over 50 % of the left ventricle in the proximal LAD model .
Complete coronary occlusion was necessary for significant collateral growth , which mostly had occurred already during the first wk after the stent occlusion .
Dynamic and competitive collateral growth patterns were observed .
EF declined from 64 to 41 % in the LCX model and to 44 % in the LAD model 4 wk after stenting with 12 and 21 % infarcted left ventricle in the LCX and LAD models , respectively .
The mortality was 32 and 37 % in the LCX and LAD models but very ( 71 % ) high in the two-vessel disease model .
The implantation of a novel bottleneck stent in the proximal LAD or LCX is a novel porcine model of reversible myocardial ischemia ( open stent ) and ischemic heart failure ( occluded stent ) and is feasible for the development of new therapeutic approaches .
Selective heart rate reduction with ivabradine unloads the left ventricle in heart failure patients .
OBJECTIVES : The study aimed to determine whether isolated heart rate ( HR ) reduction with ivabradine reduces afterload of patients with systolic heart failure .
BACKGROUND : The effective arterial elastance ( Ea ) represents resistive and pulsatile afterload of the heart derived from the pressure volume relation .
HR modulates Ea , and , therefore , afterload burden .
METHODS : Among the patients with systolic heart failure ( ejection fraction ≤ 35 % ) randomized to either placebo or ivabradine in the SHIFT ( Systolic Heart Failure Treatment With the If Inhibitor Ivabradine Trial ) , 275 patients ( n = 132 , placebo ; n = 143 , ivabradine 7.5 mg twice a day ) were included in the echocardiographic substudy .
Ea , total arterial compliance ( TAC ) , and end-systolic elastance ( Ees ) were calculated at baseline and after 8 months of treatment .
Blood pressure was measured by arm cuff ; stroke volume ( SV ) , ejection fraction , and end-diastolic volume were assessed by echocardiography .
RESULTS : At baseline Ea , TAC , HR , and Ees did not differ significantly between ivabradine- and placebo-treated patients .
After 8 months of treatment , HR was significantly reduced in the ivabradine group ( p &lt; 0.0001 ) and was accompanied by marked reduction in Ea ( p &lt; 0.0001 ) and improved TAC ( p = 0.004 ) compared with placebo .
Although contractility remained unchanged , ventricular-arterial coupling was markedly improved ( p = 0.002 ) , resulting in a higher SV ( p &lt; 0.0001 ) in the ivabradine-treated patients .
CONCLUSIONS : Isolated HR reduction by ivabradine improves TAC , thus reducing Ea .
Because Ees is unaltered , improved ventricular-arterial coupling is responsible for increased SV .
Therefore , unloading of the heart may contribute to the beneficial effect of isolated HR reduction in patients with systolic heart failure .
Relation of preoperative serum albumin levels to survival in patients undergoing left ventricular assist device implantation .
Hypoalbuminemia has been recognized as a prognostic indicator in patients with heart failure .
We aimed to investigate the association of hypoalbuminemia with postoperative mortality in patients undergoing left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) implantation .
We studied 272 consecutive patients undergoing LVAD implantation from 2000 to 2010 at our institution .
Preoperative clinical characteristics and laboratory variables associated with mortality were analyzed .
Postoperative survival of patients with preoperative hypoalbuminemia ( &lt; 3.5 g / dl , n = 125 ) and those with normal albumin concentration ( ≥ 3.5 g / dl , n = 147 ) was compared .
Survival after LVAD surgery was better in patients with normal albumin levels compared with those with hypoalbuminemia before surgery ( 3 and 12 months : 93.2 % vs 82.4 % and 88.4 % vs 75.2 % , respectively , p &lt; 0.001 ) .
Multivariate analysis revealed that preoperative albumin was independently associated with mortality after LVAD implantation ( hazard ratio 0.521 , 95 % confidence interval 0.290 to 0.934 ; p = 0.029 . )
Furthermore , the impact of normalization of albumin levels during LVAD support on postoperative survival was analyzed in both groups .
Subgroup analysis of patients with preoperative hypoalbuminemia and postoperative normalization of albumin levels ( n = 81 ) showed improved survival compared with those who remained hypoalbuminemia ( n = 44 ) or those who had decreasing albumin levels during LVAD support ( n = 40 ; 3-month survival : 92.6 % vs 63.6 % and 65.0 % ; p &lt; 0.01 ) .
In conclusion , preoperative hypoalbuminemia is associated with poor prognosis after LVAD surgery .
Postoperative normalization of albumin level is associated with improved survival .
Attention to albumin levels by correcting nutrition , inflammation , and hepatic function could be an effective way to improve prognosis in patients evaluated for LVAD implantation .
Surgical correction of aortic valve insufficiency after left ventricular assist device implantation .
OBJECTIVES : New-onset aortic insufficiency ( AI ) can be encountered after instituting mechanical circulatory support and seems more common and severe with continuous flow ( CF ) left ventricular assist devices ( LVADs ) compared with pulsatile devices .
Treatment algorithms for de novo , post-LVAD AI have not been well defined .
In the present report , we have described 6 patients who underwent aortic valve surgery for new-onset post-LVAD AI .
METHODS : From 2005 to 2011 , 271 patients underwent LVAD implantation .
Of these LVADs , 225 were CF devices ( 203 HeartMate II devices , Thoratec Corp , Pleasanton , Calif ; and 22 HVAD devices , HeartWare Intl , Inc , Framingham , Mass ) .
The patients were examined for new-onset severe AI requiring surgical intervention .
RESULTS : During follow-up , 6 CF LVAD patients developed new , severe AI that was accompanied by heart failure .
After medical therapy had failed , 4 patients underwent redo sternotomy for aortic valve procedures ( 1 bioprosthetic valve replacement , 1 Dacron patch closure , and 2 aortic valve repairs ) , and 2 patients underwent transcatheter aortic valve procedure , with 1 requiring revision by open surgery for aortic valve replacement .
Of the 6 patients , 5 experienced significant improvement in functional capacity and symptoms .
One patient died postoperatively secondary to multiorgan failure and sepsis .
CONCLUSIONS : Surgical treatment of post-LVAD AI with aortic valve oversewing or leaflet repair or by bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement is effective at restoring functional capacity for CF LVAD patients who develop symptomatic , severe AI and can be performed safely with good results .
Various transcatheter approaches to these difficult problems are also available and offer less invasive alternatives to conventional surgery .
Clinical characteristics and outcomes of young and very young adults with heart failure : The CHARM programme ( Candesartan in Heart Failure Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity ) .
OBJECTIVES : This study sought to determine the characteristics and outcomes of young adults with heart failure ( HF ) .
BACKGROUND : Few studies have focused on young and very young adults with HF .
METHODS : Patients were categorized into 5 age groups : 20 to 39 , 40 to 49 , 50 to 59 , 60 to 69 , and ≥ 70 years .
RESULTS : The youngest patients with HF were more likely to be obese ( youngest vs. oldest : body mass index ≥ 35 kg / m ( 2 ) : 23 % vs. 6 % ) , of black ethnicity ( 18 % vs. 2 % ) , and have idiopathic-dilated cardiomyopathy ( 62 % vs. 9 % ) ( all p &lt; 0.0001 ) .
They were less likely to adhere to medication ( nonadherence in youngest vs. oldest : 24 % vs. 7 % , p = 0.001 ) , salt intake , and other dietary measures ( 21 % vs. 9 % , p = 0.002 ) .
The youngest patients were less likely to have clinical and radiological signs of HF during hospitalization .
Quality of life was worse , but all-cause mortality was lowest in the youngest age group ( 3-year mortality rates across the respective age categories : 12 % , 13 % , 13 % , 19 % , and 31 % , respectively ) .
Compared with the referent age group of 60 to 69 years , both all-cause and cardiovascular mortality were lower in the youngest group even after multivariable adjustment ( hazard ratio : 0.60 , 95 % confidence interval : 0.36 to 1.00 ; p = 0.049 , and hazard ratio : 0.71 , 95 % confidence interval : 0.42 to 1.18 , p = 0.186 , respectively ) .
Three-year HF hospitalization rates were 24 % , 15 % , 15 % , 22 % , and 28 % in ages 20 to 39 , 40 to 49 , 50 to 59 , 60 to 69 , and ≥ 70 years , respectively ( p &lt; 0.0001 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Beyond divergent etiology and comorbidities , younger patients exhibited striking differences in presentation and outcomes compared with older counterparts .
Clinical and radiological signs of HF were less common , yet quality of life was more significantly impaired .
Fatal and nonfatal outcomes were discordant , with better survival despite higher hospitalization rates .
Randomized trial of Nordic walking in patients with moderate to severe heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Patients with heart failure are a growing population within cardiac rehabilitation .
The purpose of this study was to compare , through a single-centre , parallel-group , randomized controlled trial , the effects of Nordic walking and standard cardiac rehabilitation care on functional capacity and other outcomes in patients with moderate to severe heart failure .
METHODS : Between 2008 and 2009 , 54 patients ( aged 62.4 ± 11.4 years ) with heart failure ( mean ejection fraction = 26.9 % ± 5.0 % ) were randomly assigned to standard cardiac rehabilitation care ( n = 27 ) or Nordic walking ( n = 27 ) ; both groups performed 200 to 400 minutes of exercise per week for 12 weeks .
The primary outcome , measured after 12 weeks , was functional capacity assessed by a 6-minute walk test ( 6MWT ) .
RESULTS : Compared with standard care , Nordic walking led to higher functional capacity ( Δ 125.6 ± 59.4 m vs Δ 57.0 ± 71.3 m travelled during 6MWT ; P = 0.001 ) , greater self-reported physical activity ( Δ 158.5 ± 118.5 minutes vs Δ 155.5 ± 125.6 minutes ; P = 0.049 ) , increased right grip strength ( Δ 2.3 ± 3.5 kg vs Δ 0.3 ± 3.1 kg ; P = 0.026 ) , and fewer depressive symptoms ( Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale score = Δ -1.7 ± 2.4 vs Δ -0.8 ± 3.1 ; P = 0.014 ) .
No significant differences were found for peak aerobic capacity , left-hand grip strength , body weight , waist circumference , or symptoms of anxiety .
CONCLUSIONS : Nordic walking was superior to standard cardiac rehabilitation care in improving functional capacity and other important outcomes in patients with heart failure .
This exercise modality is a promising alternative for this population .
Left ventricular ejection time in acute heart failure complicating precapillary pulmonary hypertension .
BACKGROUND : Novel noninvasive tools may improve the management of patients with pulmonary hypertension ( PH ) experiencing heart failure .
Major right ventricle overload leads to decreased stroke volume , which shortens left ventricular ejection time ( LVET ) .
Our arterial tonometry study tested the hypothesis that LVET carries prognostic value in patients with precapillary PH with heart failure .
METHODS : Clinical , biologic , and radial artery tonometry variables were prospectively obtained at admission and at day 3 to 5 in 53 consecutive patients with PH admitted to our ICU for clinical deterioration .
LVET was measured from the reconstructed aortic pressure curve .
RESULTS : Overall ICU mortality ( median stay , 5 days ) was 17 % .
At admission , the LVET was shorter in patients with unfavorable outcome ( median , 228 milliseconds &#91; 25th-75th percentiles , 212-278 milliseconds &#93; vs 257 milliseconds &#91; 237-277 milliseconds &#93; , P = .032 ) , whereas other tonometric indices were similar .
The LVET at entry ( 237 milliseconds ) had 73 % sensitivity and 89 % specificity for identifying death in the ICU .
Other prognostic factors at admission were higher serum levels of brain natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) and creatinine and lower natremia .
Dobutamine requirement , higher furosemide dose , and higher oxygen flow were associated with unfavorable outcome .
At the second evaluation , higher serum levels of creatinine and BNP , higher furosemide dose and oxygen flow , and dobutamine or norepinephrine requirement were associated with poor outcome .
The change in LVET between admission and follow-up measurement was not associated with outcome .
The 90-day mortality was 28 % .
CONCLUSIONS : Shortened LVET at ICU admission was a prognostic factor in patients with precapillary PH with heart failure .
Previously documented prognostic factors were also confirmed in this cohort .
Right atrial myxoma complicated by pulmonary embolism and revealed by right heart failure .
Myxomas are the most common type of cardiac benign tumors and most of them are located in the left atrium , followed by the right atrium .
Myxomas in the right atrium may rarely embolize to the pulmonary arterial vasculature .
Here , we present a case report of a patient with right atrial myxoma and massive embolism to the pulmonary arteries treated surgically with right atrial mass removal and pulmonary embolectomy .
The right atrium mass presented with prolapse through the tricuspid valve causing a stenotic physiology .
The left pulmonary artery was completed occluded and the right pulmonary artery was partially obstructed .
Surgical tactics included a brief hypothermic circulatory arrest .
The patient had an uneventful recovery and was asymptomatic after 6 months of follow-up .
Within-day test-retest reliability of the Timed Up &amp; Go test in patients with advanced chronic organ failure .
OBJECTIVE : To investigate the within-day test-retest reliability of the Timed Up &amp; Go ( TUG ) test in patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) , chronic heart failure ( CHF ) , and chronic renal failure ( CRF ) .
DESIGN : Cross-sectional .
SETTING : Patients &apos; home environment .
PARTICIPANTS : Subjects ( N = 235 , 64 % men ; median age , 70y &#91; interquartile range , 61-77y &#93; ; median body mass index , 25.6kg / m ( 2 ) &#91; interquartile range , 22.8-29.4kg / m ( 2 ) &#93; ) with advanced COPD ( n = 95 ) , CHF ( n = 68 ) , or CRF ( n = 72 ) .
INTERVENTIONS : Not applicable .
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE : Time to complete the TUG test .
Three trials were performed on the same day and by the same assessors .
The intraclass correlation coefficient ( ICC ) , kappa coefficient , standard error of measurement , and absolute and relative minimal detectable change ( MDC ) values were calculated .
RESULTS : Good agreement was observed , in general , for both the total sample and subgroups ( COPD , CHF , CRF ) , with ICC values ranging from .85 to .98 , and kappa coefficients from .49 to 1.00 .
However , statistical improvement occurred in the total sample from the first to the second trial with large limits of agreement ( mean difference , -.97s ; 95 % confidence interval , 3.00 to -4.94s ; P &lt; .01 ) .
The third trial added little or no information to the first 2 trials .
For the total sample , a standard error of measurement value of approximately 1.6 seconds , an absolute value of MDC at the 95 % confidence level ( MDC95 % ) of approximately 4.5 seconds , and a relative value of MDC at the 95 % confidence level ( MDC95 % % ) of approximately 35 % were found between the first 2 trials , with similar values found for the subgroups .
CONCLUSIONS : The TUG test is reliable in patients with advanced COPD , CHF , or CRF after 2 trials .
Values of standard error of measurement and MDC may be used in daily clinical practice with these populations to define what is expected and what represents true change in repeated measures .
Heart failure risk among patients with rheumatoid arthritis starting a TNF antagonist .
BACKGROUND : While heart failure ( HF ) is associated with elevations in tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) α , several trials of TNF antagonists showed no benefit and possibly worsening of disease in those with known severe HF .
We studied the risk of new or recurrent HF among a group of patients receiving these agents to treat rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) .
METHODS : We used data from four different US healthcare programmes .
Subjects with RA receiving methotrexate were eligible to enter the study cohort if they added or switched to a TNF antagonist or another non-biological disease modifying antirheumatic drug ( nbDMARD ) .
These groups were compared in Cox regression models stratified by propensity score decile and adjusted for oral glucocorticoid dosage , prior HF hospitalisations , and the use of loop diuretics .
RESULTS : We compared 8656 new users of a nbDMARD with 11 587 new users of a TNF antagonist with similar baseline covariates .
The HR for the TNF antagonists compared with nbDMARD was 0.85 ( 95 % CI 0.63 to 1.14 ) .
The HR was also not elevated in subjects with a history of HF .
But , it was elevated prior to 2002 ( HR 2.17 , 95 % CI 0.45 to 10.50 , test for interaction p = 0.036 ) .
Oral glucocorticoids were associated with a dose-related gradient of HF risk : compared with no use , 1 ≤ 5 mg HR 1.30 ( 95 % CI 0.91 to 1.85 ) , ≥ 5 mg HR 1.54 ( 95 % CI 1.09 to 2.19 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : TNF antagonists were not associated with a risk of HF hospital admissions compared with nbDMARDs in this RA population .
Frailty and risk for heart failure in older adults : the health , aging , and body composition study .
OBJECTIVE : The aim of this study was to assess the association between frailty and risk for heart failure ( HF ) in older adults .
BACKGROUND : Frailty is common in the elderly and is associated with adverse health outcomes .
Impact of frailty on HF risk is not known .
METHODS : We assessed the association between frailty , using the Health ABC Short Physical Performance Battery ( HABC Battery ) and the Gill index , and incident HF in 2825 participants aged 70 to 79 years .
RESULTS : Mean age of participants was 74 ± 3 years ; 48 % were men and 59 % were white .
During a median follow up of 11.4 ( 7.1-11.7 ) years , 466 participants developed HF .
Compared to non-frail participants , moderate ( HR 1.36 , 95 % CI 1.08-1.71 ) and severe frailty ( HR 1.88 , 95 % CI 1.02-3.47 ) by Gill index was associated with a higher risk for HF .
HABC Battery score was linearly associated with HF risk after adjusting for the Health ABC HF Model ( HR 1.24 , 95 % CI 1.13-1.36 per SD decrease in score ) and remained significant when controlled for death as a competing risk ( HR 1.30 ; 95 % CI 1.00-1.55 ) .
Results were comparable across age , sex , and race , and in sub-groups based on diabetes mellitus or cardiovascular disease at baseline .
Addition of HABC Battery scores to the Health ABC HF Risk Model improved discrimination ( change in C-index , 0.014 ; 95 % CI 0.018-0.010 ) and appropriately reclassified 13.4 % ( net-reclassification-improvement 0.073 , 95 % CI 0.021-0.125 ; P = .006 ) of participants ( 8.3 % who developed HF and 5.1 % who did not ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Frailty is independently associated with risk of HF in older adults .
The role of vasopressin in congestive heart failure .
Neurohormonal abnormalities contribute to the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure ( CHF ) .
Successful approaches to improving the prognosis of patients with CHF are based largely on therapeutic interruption of activated neurohormonal systems .
The use of antagonists and inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and sympathetic nervous systems has significantly improved clinical outcomes in CHF .
Excessive secretion of arginine vasopressin ( AVP ) has the potential for deleterious effects on various physiologic processes in CHF Inhibition of AVP through vasopressin receptor antagonist therapy is a potentially beneficial new therapeutic approach to CHF .
Nfat and miR-25 cooperate to reactivate the transcription factor Hand2 in heart failure .
Although aberrant reactivation of embryonic gene programs is intricately linked to pathological heart disease , the transcription factors driving these gene programs remain ill-defined .
Here we report that increased calcineurin / Nfat signalling and decreased miR-25 expression integrate to re-express the basic helix-loop-helix ( bHLH ) transcription factor dHAND ( also known as Hand2 ) in the diseased human and mouse myocardium .
In line , mutant mice overexpressing Hand2 in otherwise healthy heart muscle cells developed a phenotype of pathological hypertrophy .
Conversely , conditional gene-targeted Hand2 mice demonstrated a marked resistance to pressure-overload-induced hypertrophy , fibrosis , ventricular dysfunction and induction of a fetal gene program .
Furthermore , in vivo inhibition of miR-25 by a specific antagomir evoked spontaneous cardiac dysfunction and sensitized the murine myocardium to heart failure in a Hand2-dependent manner .
Our results reveal that signalling cascades integrate with microRNAs to induce the expression of the bHLH transcription factor Hand2 in the postnatal mammalian myocardium with impact on embryonic gene programs in heart failure .
Epidemiology and treatment of chronic heart failure ; use of bisoprolol .
The prevalence of chronic heart failure in Hungary is 1.6 % in the adult population , but it occurs in 15-20 % of subjects over 80 years of age .
The base of treatment of heart failure is the blockade of the neuro-hormonal system , which includes the use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors ( angiotensin receptor blockers in case of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors intolerance ) , beta receptor blockers and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists .
Because of their negative inotropic effect , beta blockers were neglected for a long time from the treatment of heart failure .
However , during the past decades several studies have demonstrated that beta blockers decrease mortality in patients with heart failure .
The effectiveness of bisoprolol in reducing mortality has also also been documented in a number of studies .
Myocardial loss of IRS1 and IRS2 causes heart failure and is controlled by p38alpha MAPK during insulin resistance .
Cardiac failure is a major cause of death in patients with type 2 diabetes , but the molecular mechanism that links diabetes to heart failure remains unclear .
Insulin resistance is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes , and insulin receptor substrates 1 and 2 ( IRS1 and IRS2 ) are the major insulin-signaling components regulating cellular metabolism and survival .
To determine the role of IRS1 and IRS2 in the heart and examine whether hyperinsulinemia causes myocardial insulin resistance and cellular dysfunction via IRS1 and IRS2 , we generated heart-specific IRS1 and IRS2 gene double-knockout ( H-DKO ) mice and liver-specific IRS1 and IRS2 double-knockout ( L-DKO ) mice .
H-DKO mice had reduced ventricular mass ; developed cardiac apoptosis , fibrosis , and failure ; and showed diminished Akt → forkhead box class O-1 signaling that was accompanied by impaired cardiac metabolic gene expression and reduced ATP content .
L-DKO mice had decreased cardiac IRS1 and IRS2 proteins and exhibited features of heart failure , with impaired cardiac energy metabolism gene expression and activation of p38α mitogen-activated protein kinase ( p38 ) .
Using neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes , we further found that chronic insulin exposure reduced IRS1 and IRS2 proteins and prevented insulin action through activation of p38 , revealing a fundamental mechanism of cardiac dysfunction during insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes .
Practice-level variation in use of recommended medications among outpatients with heart failure : Insights from the NCDR PINNACLE program .
BACKGROUND : The objective of this study is to examine practice-level variation in rates of guideline-recommended treatment for outpatients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction , and to examine the association between treatment variation and practice site , independent of patient factors .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Cardiology practices participating in the National Cardiovascular Disease Registry Practice Innovation and Clinical Excellence registry from July 2008 to December 2010 were evaluated .
Practice rates of treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors / angiotensin receptor blockers and β-blockers and an optimal combined treatment measure were determined for patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction and no documented contraindications .
Multivariable hierarchical regression models were adjusted for demographics , insurance status , and comorbidities .
A median rate ratio was calculated for each therapy , which describes the likelihood that the treatment of a patient with given comorbidities would differ at 2 randomly selected practices .
We identified 12 556 patients from 45 practices .
The unadjusted practice-level prescription rates ranged from 44 % to 100 % for angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors / angiotensin receptor blockers ( median , 85 % ; interquartile range , 75 % -89 % ) , from 49 % to 100 % for β-blockers ( median , 92 % ; interquartile range , 83 % -95 % ) , and from 37 % to 100 % for optimal combined treatment ( median , 79 % ; interquartile range , 66 % -85 % ) .
The adjusted median rate ratio was 1.11 ( 95 % confidence interval , 1.08-1.18 ) for angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors / angiotensin receptor blockers therapy , 1.08 ( 95 % confidence interval , 1.05-1.15 ) for β-blockers therapy , and 1.17 ( 1.13-1.26 ) for optimal combined treatment .
CONCLUSIONS : Variation in the use of guideline-recommended medications for patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction exists in the outpatient setting .
Addressing practice-level differences may be an important component of improving quality of care for patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction .
Trastuzumab-related cardiotoxicity among older patients with breast cancer .
The use of trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting improves outcomes but is associated with cardiotoxicity manifested as congestive heart failure ( CHF ) .
The rates and risk factors associated with trastuzumab-related CHF among older patients are unknown .
Breast cancer patients at least 66 years old with full Medicare coverage , diagnosed with stage I-III breast cancer between 2005 and 2009 , and treated with chemotherapy were identified in the SEER-Medicare and in the Texas Cancer Registry – Medicare databases .
The rates and risk factors associated with CHF were evaluated .
Chemotherapy , trastuzumab use , comorbidities , and CHF were identified using International Classification of Diseases , version 9 , and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System codes .
Analyses included descriptive statistics and Cox proportional hazards models .
In total , 9,535 patients were included , of whom 2,203 ( 23.1 % ) received trastuzumab .
Median age of the entire cohort was 71 years old .
Among trastuzumab users , the rate of CHF was 29.4 % compared with 18.9 % in nontrastuzumab users ( P &lt; .001 ) .
Trastuzumab users were more likely to develop CHF than nontrastuzumab users ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; , 1.95 ; 95 % CI , 1.75 to 2.17 ) .
Among trastuzumab-treated patients , older age ( age &gt; 80 years ; HR , 1.53 ; 95 % CI , 1.16 to 2.10 ) , coronary artery disease ( HR , 1.82 ; 95 % CI , 1.34 to 2.48 ) , hypertension ( HR , 1.24 ; 95 % CI , 1.02 to 1.50 ) , and weekly trastuzumab administration ( HR , 1.33 ; 95 % CI , 1.05 to 1.68 ) increased the risk of CHF .
In this large cohort of older breast cancer patients , the rates of trastuzumb-related CHF are higher than those reported in clinical trials .
Among patients treated with trastuzumab , those with cardiac comorbidities and older age may be at higher risk .
Further studies need to confirm the role that the frequency of administration plays in the development of trastuzumab-related CHF .
Mediterranean and DASH diet scores and mortality in women with heart failure : The Women &apos;s Health Initiative .
BACKGROUND : Current dietary recommendations for patients with heart failure ( HF ) are largely based on data from non-HF populations ; evidence on associations of dietary patterns with outcomes in HF is limited .
We therefore evaluated associations of Mediterranean and Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension ( DASH ) diet scores with mortality among postmenopausal women with HF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Women &apos;s Health Initiative participants were followed up from the date of HF hospitalization through the date of death or last participant contact before August 2009 .
Mediterranean and DASH diet scores were calculated from food-frequency questionnaires .
Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for demographics , health behaviors , and health status were used to calculate hazard ratios and 95 % confidence intervals ( CI ) .
For a median of 4.6 years of follow-up , 1385 of 3215 ( 43.1 % ) participants who experienced a HF hospitalization died .
Multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios were 1 ( reference ) , 1.05 ( 95 % CI , 0.89-1.24 ) , 0.97 ( 95 % CI , 0.81-1.17 ) , and 0.85 ( 95 % CI , 0.70-1.02 ) across quartiles of the Mediterranean diet score ( P trend = 0.08 ) and 1 ( reference ) , 1.04 ( 95 % CI , 0.89-1.21 ) , 0.83 ( 95 % CI , 0.70-0.98 ) , and 0.84 ( 95 % CI , 0.70-1.00 ) across quartiles of the DASH diet score ( P trend = 0.01 ) .
Diet score components , vegetables , nuts , and whole grain intake , were inversely associated with mortality .
CONCLUSIONS : Higher DASH diet scores were associated with modestly lower mortality in women with HF , and there was a nonsignificant trend toward an inverse association with Mediterranean diet scores .
These data provide support for the concept that dietary recommendations developed for other cardiovascular conditions or general populations may also be appropriate in patients with HF .
Soluble ST2 in ambulatory patients with heart failure : Association with functional capacity and long-term outcomes .
BACKGROUND : ST2 is involved in cardioprotective signaling in the myocardium and has been identified as a potentially promising biomarker in heart failure ( HF ) .
We evaluated ST2 levels and their association with functional capacity and long-term clinical outcomes in a cohort of ambulatory patients with HF enrolled in the Heart Failure : A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training ( HF-ACTION ) study-a multicenter , randomized study of exercise training in HF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : HF-ACTION randomized 2331 patients with left ventricular ejection fraction &lt; 0.35 and New York Heart Association class II to IV HF to either exercise training or usual care .
ST2 was analyzed in a subset of 910 patients with evaluable plasma samples .
Correlations and Cox models were used to assess the relationship among ST2 , functional capacity , and long-term outcomes .
The median baseline ST2 level was 23.7 ng / mL ( interquartile range , 18.6-31.8 ) .
ST2 was modestly associated with measures of functional capacity .
In univariable analysis , ST2 was significantly associated with death or hospitalization ( hazard ratio , 1.48 ; P &lt; 0.0001 ) , cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization ( hazard ratio , 2.14 ; P &lt; 0.0001 ) , and all-cause mortality ( hazard ratio , 2.33 ; P &lt; 0.0001 ; all hazard ratios for log2 ng / mL ) .
In multivariable models , ST2 remained independently associated with outcomes after adjustment for clinical variables and amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide .
However , ST2 did not add significantly to reclassification of risk as assessed by changes in the C statistic , net reclassification improvement , and integrated discrimination improvement .
CONCLUSIONS : ST2 was modestly associated with functional capacity and was significantly associated with outcomes in a well-treated cohort of ambulatory patients with HF although it did not significantly affect reclassification of risk .
Ten-year experience with extended criteria cardiac transplantation .
BACKGROUND : Extended criteria cardiac transplant ( ECCT ) programs expand the transplant pool by matching donors and recipients typically excluded from the transplant process because of age or comorbidity .
There is a paucity of data examining long-term outcomes with this strategy .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Between January 2000 and December 2009 , adult patients undergoing isolated heart transplant were prospectively classified as ECCT based on prespecified criteria .
Baseline characteristics and outcomes were compared between ECCT and standard criteria cardiac transplant recipients .
Two Cox proportional hazards models were developed .
The first to identify clinical variables contributing to survival between the 2 groups , and the second to determine the additional risk associated with assignment to ECCT .
Among the 454 patients who underwent heart transplant , 84 ( 18.5 % ) were ECCT .
Compared with the patients who underwent standard criteria cardiac transplant , ECCT patients were older ( median , 66.6 years versus 53.2 years ; P &lt; 0.001 ) , with higher frequency of diabetes mellitus ( 46.4 % versus 24.6 % ; P &lt; 0.001 ) and chronic kidney disease ( median estimated glomerular filtration rate , 55 versus 61.6 mL / min ; P = 0.001 ) .
After adjustment for baseline characteristics , standard criteria cardiac transplant survival was higher than ECCT at 1 ( 89 % versus 86 % ; P = 0.18 ) and 5 ( 77 % versus 66 % ; P = 0.035 ) years .
In a multivariate model that included listing criteria , creatinine ( hazard ratio , 1.05 per 0.1 mg / dL ; 95 % confidence interval , 1.02-1.09 ; P = 0.001 ) was a significant predictor of post-transplant mortality .
CONCLUSIONS : ECCT is an acceptable alternative for advanced heart failure therapy in select patients .
Age and renal dysfunction are important determinants of long-term survival and post-transplant morbidity .
Change in readmissions and follow-up visits as part of a heart failure readmission quality improvement initiative .
OBJECTIVES : The study objectives were to quantify the change in 7-day follow-up visits and 30-day readmissions as part of a hospital quality improvement initiative and to characterize events at 7-day follow-up visits .
Some data suggest that outpatient assessments of patients with heart failure within 7 days of hospital discharge may prevent readmissions , although little is known about patient needs at 7-day follow-up visits .
METHODS : We performed a single-center , retrospective chart review of all heart failure discharges at the University of Connecticut Health Center ( 398 patients ) the year before ( 2008 ) and the year after ( 2011 ) a quality improvement initiative that included mandatory 7-day follow-up visits .
We quantified the change in 30-day readmission rate after the initiative , frequency of 7-day follow-up visits , and events at follow-up visits .
RESULTS : The average age of patients with heart failure was 79.9 years in 2011 , with 45.9 % having systolic heart failure .
Thirty-day all-cause readmissions decreased from 27.5 % to 19.1 % after our quality improvement initiative ( P = .024 ) .
Frequency of 7-day follow-up visits increased from 19.6 % to 46.9 % ( P &lt; .01 ) .
Eighty-one percent of 7-day visits occurred in the University of Connecticut Heart Failure Center with a cardiologist or heart failure nurse practitioner .
Fifty-one percent of patients had blood work drawn , and 26 % had a medication dose changed .
Only 13 % of patients had no discrepancy between the discharge and follow-up medication lists .
CONCLUSIONS : Our hospital &apos;s 30-day readmission rate for patients with heart failure decreased in parallel with an increase in 7-day follow-up visits .
Patients with heart failure were complex and often had diagnostic testing and medication changes at follow-up visits .
Cardiac magnetic resonance postcontrast T1 time is associated with outcome in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction .
BACKGROUND : The underlying pathophysiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFPEF ) is incompletely understood , but myocardial extracellular matrix accumulation is thought to play a major role .
Our aims were to estimate myocardial extracellular matrix using cardiac magnetic resonance T1 mapping and to assess the relationship between pathobiology / pathophysiology and prognosis .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Patients with suspected HFPEF ( n = 100 ) were enrolled in this prospective , observational study .
Confirmatory diagnostic tests , cardiac magnetic resonance imaging including T1 mapping , and invasive hemodynamic assessments were performed at baseline .
Sixty-one patients with confirmed HFPEF entered a longitudinal outcome-monitoring phase ( mean , 22.9 ± 5.0 months ) , during which 16 had a cardiac event .
Cardiac magnetic resonance T1 time ( hazard ratio , 0.99 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.98-0.99 ; P = 0.046 ) , left atrial area ( hazard ratio , 1.08 ; 95 % confidence interval , 1.03-1.13 ; P &lt; 0.01 ) , and pulmonary vascular resistance ( hazard ratio , 1.01 ; 95 % confidence interval , 1.00-1.01 ; P = 0.03 ) were significantly associated with cardiac events .
Patients with T1 times below the median ( &lt; 388.3 ms ) were at greater risk of cardiac events than the rest of the group ( P &lt; 0.01 ) .
Extracellular matrix of left ventricular biopsies ( n = 9 ) , quantified by TissueFAXS technology correlated with T1 time ( R = 0.98 ; P &lt; 0.01 ) .
T1 time also correlated with right ventricular-pulmonary arterial coupling ( pulmonary vascular resistance : R = -0.36 ; P &lt; 0.01 ; right ventricular ejection fraction : R = 0.28 ; P = 0.01 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In the present preliminary study , cardiac magnetic resonance postcontrast T1 time is associated with prognosis in HFPEF , suggesting postcontrast T1 as possible biomarker for HFPEF .
Impact of heart magnetic resonance imaging on chelation choices , compliance with treatment and risk of heart disease in patients with thalassaemia major .
This study aimed to verify the impact of heart magnetic resonance imaging on chelation choices and patient compliance in a single-institution cohort as well as its predictive value for heart failure and arrhythmias .
Abnormal cardiac T2 * values determined changes in treatment in most subjects .
Heart T2 * was confirmed to be highly predictive over 1 year for heart failure and arrhythmias .
The choice of chelation regimens known to remove heart iron efficiently was not sufficient by itself to influence the risk .
Compliance with treatment had a more remarkable role .
Impact of ejection fraction on the clinical response to cardiac resynchronization therapy in mild heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Current guidelines recommend cardiac resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) in mild heart failure ( HF ) patients with QRS prolongation and ejection fraction ( EF ) ≤ 30 % .
To assess the effect of CRT in less severe systolic dysfunction , outcomes in the REsynchronization reVErses Remodeling in Systolic left vEntricular dysfunction ( REVERSE ) study were evaluated in which patients with left ventricular ( LV ) ejection fraction ( LVEF ) &gt; 30 % were included .
METHODS AND RESULTS : The results of patients with baseline EF &gt; 30 % ( n = 177 ) and those with EF ≤ 30 % ( n = 431 ) , as determined by a blinded core laboratory , were compared .
In the LVEF &gt; 30 % subgroup , there was a trend for improvement in the clinical composite response with CRT ON versus CRT OFF ( P = 0.06 ) and significant reductions in LV end systolic volume index ( -6.7 ± 21.1 versus 2.1 ± 17.6 mL / m ( 2 ) ; P = 0.01 ) and LV mass ( -20.6 ± 50.5 versus 5.0 ± 42.4 g ; P = 0.04 ) after 12 months .
The time to death or first HF hospitalization was significantly prolonged with CRT ( hazard ratio , 0.26 ; P = 0.012 ) .
In the LVEF &lt; 30 % subgroup , significant improvements in clinical composite response ( P = 0.02 ) , reverse remodeling parameters , and time to death or first HF hospitalization ( hazard ratio , 0.58 ; P = 0.047 ) were observed .
After adjusting for important covariates , the CRT ON assignment remained independently associated with improved time to death or first HF hospitalization ( hazard ratio , 0.54 ; P = 0.035 ) , whereas there was no significant interaction with LVEF .
CONCLUSIONS : Among subjects with mild HF , QRS prolongation , and LVEF &gt; 30 % , CRT produced reverse remodeling and similar clinical benefit compared with subjects with more severe LV systolic dysfunction .
Myocardial titin hypophosphorylation importantly contributes to heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in a rat metabolic risk model .
BACKGROUND : Obesity and diabetes mellitus are important metabolic risk factors and frequent comorbidities in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
They contribute to myocardial diastolic dysfunction ( DD ) through collagen deposition or titin modification .
The relative importance for myocardial DD of collagen deposition and titin modification was investigated in obese , diabetic ZSF1 rats after heart failure with preserved ejection fraction development at 20 weeks .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Four groups of rats ( Wistar-Kyoto , n = 11 ; lean ZSF1 , n = 11 ; obese ZSF1 , n = 11 , and obese ZSF1 with high-fat diet , n = 11 ) were followed up for 20 weeks with repeat metabolic , renal , and echocardiographic evaluations and hemodynamically assessed at euthanization .
Myocardial collagen , collagen cross-linking , titin isoforms , and phosphorylation were also determined .
Resting tension ( Fpassive ) -sarcomere length relations were obtained in small muscle strips before and after KCl-KI treatment , which unanchors titin and allows contributions of titin and extracellular matrix to Fpassive to be discerned .
At 20 weeks , the lean ZSF1 group was hypertensive , whereas both obese ZSF1 groups were hypertensive and diabetic .
Only the obese ZSF1 groups had developed heart failure with preserved ejection fraction , which was evident from increased lung weight , preserved left ventricular ejection fraction , and left ventricular DD .
The underlying myocardial DD was obvious from high muscle strip stiffness , which was largely ( ± 80 % ) attributable to titin hypophosphorylation .
The latter occurred specifically at the S3991 site of the elastic N2Bus segment and at the S12884 site of the PEVK segment .
CONCLUSIONS : Obese ZSF1 rats developed heart failure with preserved ejection fraction during a 20-week time span .
Titin hypophosphorylation importantly contributed to the underlying myocardial DD .
Global left ventricular longitudinal systolic strain as a major predictor of cardiovascular events in patients with atrial fibrillation .
OBJECTIVE : Although global left ventricular longitudinal systolic strain ( GLS ) is a sensitive measure of left ventricular mechanics , its relationship with adverse cardiovascular ( CV ) events in atrial fibrillation ( AF ) has not been evaluated .
This study sought to examine the ability of GLS in predicting CV events in AF .
DESIGN : Observational cohort study .
SETTING : Department of cardiology in a university hospital .
PATIENTS : 196 persistent AF patients referred for echocardiographic examination .
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES : The risk of GLS measured by index beat method for CV events was assessed by Cox proportional hazards analyses .
CV events were defined as CV death , non-fatal stroke and hospitalisation for heart failure .
RESULTS : There were 19 CV deaths , 12 non-fatal stroke and 28 hospitalisations for heart failure during an average follow-up of 21 ± 10 months .
Multivariate analysis showed worsening GLS ( HR 1.121 ; 95 % CI 1.023 to 1.228 , p = 0.014 ) was independently associated with increased CV events .
In direct comparison , GLS outperformed left ventricular ejection fraction ( LVEF ) and systolic mitral annulus velocity ( Sa ) in predicting adverse CV events both in univariate and multivariate models ( p ≤ 0.043 ) .
Besides , the addition of GLS to a Cox model containing chronic heart failure , hypertension , age ≥ 75 years , diabetes , prior stroke score , estimated glomerular filtration rate , LVEF and Sa provided an additional benefit in the prediction of adverse CV events ( p = 0.022 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : GLS was a major parameter and stronger than LVEF and Sa in predicting adverse CV events and could offer an additional prognostic benefit over conventional clinical and echocardiographic systolic parameters in AF .
Impact of QRS morphology and duration on outcomes after cardiac resynchronization therapy : Results from the Resynchronization-Defibrillation for Ambulatory Heart Failure Trial ( RAFT ) .
BACKGROUND : The impact of QRS morphology and duration on the effectiveness of cardiac resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) has been usually assessed separately .
The interaction between these 2 simple ECG parameters and their effect on CRT has not been systematically assessed in a large-scale clinical trial .
METHODS AND RESULTS : The Resynchronization-Defibrillation for Ambulatory Heart Failure Trial showed that implantable cardioverter defibrillator-CRT was associated with a significant reduction in the primary end point of all-cause mortality or heart failure hospitalization .
For this substudy , we excluded patients in atrial fibrillation and those with a previous pacemaker .
All baseline ECGs were reviewed by a panel of 3 experienced electrocardiographers .
A total of 1483 patients were included in this study .
Of these , 1175 had left bundle-branch block ( LBBB ) and 308 had non-LBBB .
In patients with LBBB receiving implantable cardioverter defibrillator-CRT , there was a reduction in the primary outcome and in each individual component of the primary outcome .
Furthermore , there was continuous relationship between QRS duration and extent of benefit .
In patients with non-LBBB and QRS ≥ 160 ms , the hazard ratio for the primary outcome was 0.52 ( 0.29-0.96 ; P = 0.033 ) ; in patients with QRS &lt; 160 ms , the hazard ratio was 1.38 ( 0.88-2.14 ; P = 0.155 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In patients with LBBB , there was a continuous relationship between broader QRS and greater benefit from implantable cardioverter defibrillator-CRT .
However , our data do not support the use of implantable cardioverter defibrillator-CRT in patients with non-LBBB , especially when the QRS duration is &lt; 160 ms .
There may be some delayed benefit when the QRS is ≥ 160 ms , but this needs further investigation .
Uptitration of renin-angiotensin system blocker and beta-blocker therapy in patients hospitalized for heart failure with reduced versus preserved left ventricular ejection fractions .
In ambulatory patients with heart failure ( HF ) and reduced ejection fraction ( rEF ) , renin-angiotensin system ( RAS ) and β-blockers at guideline-recommended target dose reduce all-cause mortality and readmissions .
Benefits in HF with preserved ejection fraction ( pEF ) , as well as uptitration after a hospitalization , remain uncertain .
This study assesses the impact of RAS- and β-blocker uptitrations in patients with HFrEF versus HFpEF during and immediately after a hospital admission .
In consecutive patients ( 209 HFrEF with left ventricular ejection fraction &lt; 40 % and 108 HFpEF with left ventricular ejection fraction ≥ 40 % ) , RAS- and β-blocker dose changes were followed during 6 months after an index HF hospitalization .
Patients with a RAS- and β-blocker dose increase of ≥ 10 % of the recommended target dose were compared with patients without uptitration .
Patients who received uptitration were significantly younger , with a higher heart rate and better renal function , and received spironolactone more often .
Both RAS- and β-blocker uptitrations were associated with significant reductions in the composite end-point of all-cause mortality or HF readmissions in HFrEF ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; 0.36 , 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; 0.22 to 0.60 and HR 0.51 , 95 % CI 0.32 to 0.81 , respectively ) .
After correction for age , heart rate , blood pressure , renal function , and spironolactone use , this association remained significant for RAS blockers ( HR 0.54 , 95 % CI 0.31 to 0.93 , p = 0.027 ) but not for β-blockers ( HR 0.65 , 95 % CI 0.39 to 1.09 , p = 0.101 ) .
No benefit of RAS- or β-blocker uptitration was observed in HFpEF .
In conclusion , uptitration of neurohumoral blockers after an HF hospitalization is more frequently performed in younger patients with low co-morbidity burden .
RAS-blocker uptitration independently predicts clinical outcome in patients with HFrEF but not in those with HFpEF .
Nitroxyl ( HNO ) : A novel approach for the acute treatment of heart failure .
BACKGROUND : The nitroxyl ( HNO ) donor , Angeli &apos;s salt , exerts positive inotropic , lusitropic , and vasodilator effects in vivo that are cAMP independent .
Its clinical usefulness is limited by chemical instability and cogeneration of nitrite which itself has vascular effects .
Here , we report on effects of a novel , stable , pure HNO donor ( CXL-1020 ) in isolated myoctyes and intact hearts in experimental models and in patients with heart failure ( HF ) .
METHODS AND RESULTS : CXL-1020 converts solely to HNO and inactive CXL-1051 with a t1 / 2 of 2 minutes .
In adult mouse ventricular myocytes , it dose dependently increased sarcomere shortening by 75 % to 210 % ( 50-500 μmol / L ) , with a ≈ 30 % rise in the peak Ca ( 2 + ) transient only at higher doses .
Neither inhibition of protein kinase A nor soluble guanylate cyclase altered this contractile response .
Unlike isoproterenol , CXL-1020 was equally effective in myocytes from normal or failing hearts .
In anesthetized dogs with coronary microembolization-induced HF , CXL-1020 reduced left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and myocardial oxygen consumption while increasing ejection fraction from 27 % to 40 % and maximal ventricular power index by 42 % ( both P &lt; 0.05 ) .
In conscious dogs with tachypacing-induced HF , CXL-1020 increased contractility assessed by end-systolic elastance and provided venoarterial dilation .
Heart rate was minimally altered .
In patients with systolic HF , CXL-1020 reduced both left and right heart filling pressures and systemic vascular resistance , while increasing cardiac and stroke volume index .
Heart rate was unchanged , and arterial pressure declined modestly .
CONCLUSIONS : These data show the functional efficacy of a novel pure HNO donor to enhance myocardial function and present first-in-man evidence for its potential usefulness in HF .
Using exercise to improve quality of life for people with heart failure .
Abstract In the current economic climate within the NHS , behavioural-change interventions in chronic disease such as exercise programmes will be time-limited within acute hospital facilities .
The challenge is to deliver cost-effective , participatory , population-specific health interventions that result in measurable benefits .
METHODOLOGY : A mixed-methods study was undertaken to assess the benefits of participation in a structured exercise programme for patients with heart failure .
Primary outcomes were improvements in functional capacity and quality of life .
Secondary outcome measures related to patient satisfaction and sustainability of the intervention post study .
RESULTS : Overall significant improvements were not found in quality of life or functional capacity ; some participants demonstrated significant improvements with others showing minor improvement or no improvement in one or both domains .
CONCLUSIONS : Anecdotal evidence of perceived benefit was expressed in participant satisfaction responses .
Secondary outcomes were met in relation to sustainability with commissioning of hospital- and community-based programmes on completion of the study .
Reduced hospitalizations in severe , refractory congestive heart failure with peritoneal dialysis : a consecutive case series .
BACKGROUND : Peritoneal dialysis ( PD ) for long-term management of diuretic resistant volume overload in heart failure ( HF ) may provide potential benefit with few adverse consequences .
We examined the impact of PD on clinical status hospitalizations , and complications of therapy in severe end-stage HF .
METHODS : A consecutive case series of 10 transplant ineligible patients receiving PD solely for HF volume management between 2007 and 2011 was evaluated with clinical data reviewed pre- and post-PD initiation .
RESULTS : The mean ejection fraction ( EF ) pre-PD was 24.5 ± 6.0 % with the majority of patients having NYHA class IIIB symptoms and moderate-severe right ventricular dysfunction .
9 / 10 patients were Stage 3 chronic kidney disease ( CKD ) or worse .
After PD initiation , average weight loss was almost 7 kg ( p = 0.016 ) with improvement in diuretic response , peripheral edema , and functional class .
There was a significant decrease in re-hospitalization from an average of 3.2 ± 2.5 to 0.1 ± 0.3 admissions per patient ( p = 0.007 ) and reduced average length of stay from 37 ± 36.7 to 0.78 ± 2.3 days ( p = 0.019 ) .
SUMMARY : Objective criteriabased institution of PD for the treatment of diuretic refractory severe-end-stage HF was well tolerated and demonstrated favorable outcomes ; these included improved clinical status , reduced hospitalizations and length of stay , with very few and easily treatable PDrelated complications .
PD appears to be a viable option in refractory , end-stage congestive heart failure ( CHF ) .
Heart failure : a disease complex with challenging therapeutics .
Heart failure ( HF ) is the most common cause of cardiovascular hospitalization , especially among the elderly .
It has a higher mortality and morbidity than several cancers and consumes a significant portion of the health-care budget .
HF with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) is commoner among women who may have underlying hypertension .
Significant progress has been achieved in the development of lifesaving drugs for HF with reduced ejection fraction ( HFrEF ) .
However , treatment of HFpEF still poses significant challenges .
Perturbations in skeletal muscle sarcomere structure in patients with heart failure and type 2 diabetes : restorative effects of ( - ) -epicatechin-rich cocoa .
HF ( heart failure ) and T2D ( Type 2 diabetes ) associate with detrimental alterations in SkM ( skeletal muscle ) structure / function .
We have demonstrated recently that ( - ) -ERC ( epicatechin-rich cocoa ) improves SkM mitochondrial structure &#91; Taub , Ramirez-Sanchez , Ciaraldi , Perkins , Murphy , Naviaux , Hogan , Ceballos , Maisel , Henry et al .
( 2012 ) Clin .
Trans .
Sci .
5 , 43-47 &#93; .
We hypothesized that an improved mitochondrial structure may facilitate the reversal of detrimental alterations in sarcomeric microstructure .
In a pilot study , five patients with HF and T2D consumed ERC for 3 months ; treadmill testing &#91; VO2max ( maximum oxygen consumption ) &#93; and SkM biopsies were performed .
Western blot analysis , immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy were used .
We report severe perturbations in components of the DAPC ( dystrophin-associated protein complex ) as well as sarcomeric microstructure at baseline .
ERC induced recovery / enhancement of DAPC protein levels , sarcomeric microstructure and , in a co-ordinated fashion , alterations in markers of SkM growth / differentiation consistent with myofibre regeneration .
VO2max increased ( ~ 24 % ) but did not reach statistical significance .
These initial results warrant further rigorous investigation , since the use of ERC ( or pure epicatechin ) may represent a safe and novel means of improving muscle function .
Nursing-sensitive outcome change scores for hospitalized older adults with heart failure : a preliminary descriptive study .
Nursing has a social mandate to ensure effective practice within its domain and to be accountable for the outcomes of nursing care .
Using standardized nursing terminologies makes it possible to measure aspects of nursing care .
The purpose of this study was to determine whether a significant difference in outcome ratings exists from admission to discharge for hospitalized older adults with heart failure ( HF ) using Nursing Outcomes Classification ( NOC ) .
A retrospective descriptive research design was used .
Data were obtained from 268 inpatient records of patients discharged with HF during a 1-year period .
All top 10 NOC outcomes demonstrated statistically significant improvement in outcome ratings from admission to discharge .
Findings from this study provide insight on the possible contribution of nursing to outcomes of hospitalized older adults with HF .
Validating and incorporating nursing-sensitive outcome measures in future prospective experimental research can contribute to the advancement of science regarding effective treatment of older adults hospitalized with HF , while highlighting the contribution of nursing care to outcomes .
Reversal of cardiac dysfunction and subcellular alterations by metoprolol in heart failure due to myocardial infarction .
In order to examine the reversibility of heart failure due to myocardial infarction ( MI ) by β-adrenoceptor blockade , 12 weeks infarcted rats were treated with or without metoprolol ( 50 mg / kg / day ) for 8 weeks .
The depressed left ventricular ( LV ) systolic pressure , positive and negative rates of changes in pressure development , ejection fraction , fractional shortening and cardiac output , as well as increased LV end-diastolic pressure in 20 weeks MI animals were partially reversed by metoprolol .
MI-induced decreases in septum ( systolic ) thickness as well as increase in LV posterior wall thickness and LV internal diameter were partially or fully reversible by metoprolol .
Treatment of MI animals with metoprolol partially reversed the elevated levels of plasma norepinephrine and dopamine without affecting the elevated levels of epinephrine .
Although sarcoplasmic reticular ( SR ) Ca ( 2 + ) -uptake , as well as protein content for SR Ca ( 2 + ) -pump and phospholamban , were reduced in the infarcted hearts ; these changes were partially reversible with metoprolol .
Depressed myofibrillar Ca ( 2 + ) -stimulated ATPase activity , as well as mRNA levels for SR Ca ( 2 + ) -pump , phospholamban and α-myosin heavy chain , were unaffected whereas increased mRNA level for β-myosin heavy chain was partially reversed by metoprolol .
The results suggest that partial improvement of cardiac performance by β-adrenoceptor blockade at advanced stages of heart failure may be due to partial reversal of changes in SR Ca ( 2 + ) -pump function whereas partial to complete reverse cardiac remodeling may be due to partial reduction in the elevated levels of plasma catecholamines .
Physician volume , specialty , and outcomes of care for patients with heart failure .
BACKGROUND : There is an urgent need to improve outcomes and reduce costs for patients with heart failure ( HF ) .
Physician volume is associated with better outcomes for patients undergoing procedures , but its association with outcomes for medically managed diseases , such as HF , is not well understood .
METHODS AND RESULTS : We used Medicare inpatient data in 2009 to examine all HF admissions to acute care hospitals in the United States .
We divided physicians into quintiles according to their volume of patients with HF .
We used patient-level regression to compare 30-day risk-adjusted mortality , readmissions , and costs across volume groups , controlling for patient , physician , and hospital characteristics .
We examined physician volume within strata of hospital volume and physician specialty .
Patients cared for by the high-volume physicians had lower mortality than those by the low-volume physicians ( 8.9 % versus 9.7 % ; P &lt; 0.001 ) ; this relationship was strongest in low-volume hospitals .
In contrast , patients cared for by high-volume physicians had higher readmission rates ( 25.8 % versus 21.5 % ; P &lt; 0001 ) ; this relationship was similar across hospital volume groups .
Finally , costs were higher for the high-volume physicians ( $ 8982 versus $ 8731 ; P = 0.002 , a difference that was consistent across hospital volume groups ) .
The relationship between physician volume and mortality was strongest for internists ( 9.2 % versus 10.6 % ; P &lt; 0.001 ) and weakest for cardiologists ( 6.4 % versus 6.7 % ; P = 0.485 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Physician volume is associated with lower mortality for HF , particularly in low-volume institutions and among noncardiologist physicians .
Our findings suggest that clinician expertise may play an important role in HF care .
Usefulness and consequences of cardiac resynchronization therapy in dialysis-dependent patients with heart failure .
Cardiac resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) is often deferred in dialysis-dependent patients with heart failure ( HF ) because of a perceived lack of benefit and potentially higher risks , although the outcomes associated with CRT in dialysis have not been reported .
We therefore studied our center &apos;s experience with CRT in dialysis-dependent patients .
We constructed a descriptive assessment of these patients ( n = 15 ) and performed a case-control analysis matching for age , gender , bundle branch morphology , diabetes mellitus , cardiomyopathy origin , and β-blocker and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker use .
Baseline and 6-month echocardiograms were assessed for evidence of reverse remodeling .
No periprocedural or long-term complications were observed among dialysis patients .
Heterogenous improvement in ejection fraction ( + 3.1 ± 9.2 % ) was noted and 2 patients derived absolute improvements of 8 % and 22 % , respectively .
Dialysis patients demonstrated the following 3-year event rates : HF hospitalization , 31 % ; all-cause hospitalization , 100 % ; mortality , 73 % ; and HF hospitalization or death , 82 % .
In the case-control analysis , controls demonstrated superior reverse remodeling ( + 9.2 ± 9.5 % increase in ejection fraction ) , decreased mortality ( 73 % vs 44 % , p = 0.038 ) , and all-cause hospitalizations ( 76 % vs 100 % , p = 0.047 ) , with no difference in HF hospitalizations ( p = 0.39 ) , compared with dialysis patients .
In conclusion , at our center , the dialysis-dependent patients with HF who underwent CRT implantation did so safely and no serious complications were observed .
Certain dialysis patients demonstrated compelling improvement after device implantation .
Compared with matched controls , dialysis patients were at increased risk for adverse events and worsened echocardiographic outcomes .
Low-sodium DASH diet improves diastolic function and ventricular-arterial coupling in hypertensive heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
BACKGROUND : Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFPEF ) involves failure of cardiovascular reserve in multiple domains .
In HFPEF animal models , dietary sodium restriction improves ventricular and vascular stiffness and function .
We hypothesized that the sodium-restricted dietary approaches to stop hypertension diet ( DASH / SRD ) would improve left ventricular diastolic function , arterial elastance , and ventricular-arterial coupling in hypertensive HFPEF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Thirteen patients with treated hypertension and compensated HFPEF consumed the DASH / SRD ( target sodium , 50 mmol / 2100 kcal ) for 21 days .
We measured baseline and post-DASH / SRD brachial and central blood pressure ( via radial arterial tonometry ) and cardiovascular function with echocardiographic measures ( all previously invasively validated ) .
Diastolic function was quantified via the parametrized diastolic filling formalism that yields relaxation / viscoelastic ( c ) and passive / stiffness ( k ) constants through the analysis of Doppler mitral inflow velocity ( E-wave ) contours .
Effective arterial elastance ( Ea ) end-systolic elastance ( Ees ) and ventricular-arterial coupling ( defined as the ratio Ees : Ea ) were determined using previously published techniques .
Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank tests were used for pre-post comparisons .
The DASH / SRD reduced clinic and 24-hour brachial systolic pressure ( 155 ± 35 to 138 ± 30 and 130 ± 16 to 123 ± 18 mm Hg ; both P = 0.02 ) , and central end-systolic pressure trended lower ( 116 ± 18 to 111 ± 16 mm Hg ; P = 0.12 ) .
In conjunction , diastolic function improved ( c = 24.3 ± 5.3 to 22.7 ± 8.1 g / s ; P = 0.03 ; k = 252 ± 115 to 170 ± 37 g / s ( 2 ) ; P = 0.03 ) , Ea decreased ( 2.0 ± 0.4 to 1.7 ± 0.4 mm Hg / mL ; P = 0.007 ) , and ventricular-arterial coupling improved ( Ees : Ea = 1.5 ± 0.3 to 1.7 ± 0.4 ; P = 0.04 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In patients with hypertensive HFPEF , the sodium-restricted DASH diet was associated with favorable changes in ventricular diastolic function , arterial elastance , and ventricular-arterial coupling .
Human resistin in chemotherapy-induced heart failure in humanized male mice and in women treated for breast cancer .
Resistin is a circulating mediator of insulin resistance mainly expressed in human monocytes and responsive to inflammatory stimuli .
Recent clinical studies have connected elevated resistin levels with the development and severity of heart failure .
To further our understanding of the role of human resistin in heart failure , we studied a humanized mouse model lacking murine resistin but transgenic for the human Retn gene ( Hum-Retn mice ) , which exhibits basal and inflammation-stimulated resistin levels similar to humans .
Specifically , we explored whether resistin underlies acute anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity .
Remarkably , doxorubicin ( 25mg / kg ip ) led to a 4-fold induction of serum resistin levels in Hum-Retn mice .
Moreover , doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity was greater in the Hum-Retn mice than in littermate controls not expressing human resistin ( Retn ( - / - ) ) .
Hum-Retn mice showed increased cardiac mRNA levels of inflammatory and cell adhesion genes compared with Retn ( - / - ) mice .
Macrophages , but not cardiomyocytes , from Hum-Retn mice treated with doxorubicin in vitro showed dramatic induction of hRetn ( human resistin ) mRNA and protein expression .
We also examined resistin levels in anthracycline-treated breast cancer patients with and without cardiotoxicity .
Intriguingly , serum resistin levels in women undergoing anthracycline-containing chemotherapy increased significantly at 3 months and remained elevated at 6 months in those with subsequent cardiotoxicity .
Further , elevation in resistin correlated with decline in ejection fraction in these women .
These results suggest that elevated resistin is a biomarker of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and may contribute in the development of heart failure via its direct effects on macrophages .
These results further implicate resistin as a link between inflammation , metabolism , and heart disease .
Efficacy , safety , and outcomes of catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
OBJECTIVES : This study sought to investigate the efficacy and safety of catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation ( AF ) in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFPEF ) .
BACKGROUND : AF is a precipitating factor for clinical deterioration of HFPEF .
METHODS : Catheter ablation for AF was performed in a consecutive 74 patients with compensated HFPEF ( left ventricular &#91; LV &#93; ejection fraction &gt; 50 % ) .
AF-free probability after catheter ablation and factors relating to maintenance of sinus rhythm were investigated .
LV strain and strain rate were assessed by echocardiography at baseline and over 12 months after ablation .
RESULTS : During a 34 ± 16-month follow-up period , single- and multiple-procedure drug-free success rates were 27 % ( n = 20 ) and 45 % ( n = 33 ) , respectively .
Multiple procedures and pharmaceutically assisted success rate was 73 % ( n = 54 ) .
No major complications occurred during follow-up .
Multivariate Cox regression analyses revealed that AF type ( other than long-standing persistent AF ) and lack of hypertension were independently associated with maintenance of sinus rhythm ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; : 1.81 , 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; : 1.03 to 3.17 , p = 0.04 ; HR : 0.49 , 95 % CI : 0.24 to 0.96 , p = 0.04 , respectively ) .
LV systolic indices ( LV ejection fraction , LV strain / strain rate at systole ) and diastolic indices ( E / E &apos; , ratio of LV strain rate at diastole with early transmitral flow ) were improved only in patients maintaining sinus rhythm at follow-up .
CONCLUSIONS : Our results suggest that AF can be effectively and safely treated with a composite of repeat procedures and pharmaceuticals in patients with HFPEF .
However , the current study was a single-arm analysis ; therefore , larger randomized control studies are needed to verify the benefit of AF ablation in this cohort .
Nicorandil ameliorates mitochondrial dysfunction in doxorubicin-induced heart failure in rats : possible mechanism of cardioprotection .
Despite of its known cardiotoxicity , doxorubicin is still a highly effective anti-neoplastic agent in the treatment of several cancers .
In the present study , the cardioprotective effect of nicorandil was investigated on hemodynamic alterations and mitochondrial dysfunction induced by cumulative administration of doxorubicin in rats .
Doxorubicin was injected i.p.
over 2 weeks to obtain a cumulative dose of 18 mg / kg .
Nicorandil ( 3 mg / kg / day ) was given orally with or without doxorubicin treatment .
Heart rate and aortic blood flow were recorded 24 h after receiving the last dose of doxorubicin .
Rats were then sacrificed and hearts were rapidly excised for estimation of caspase-3 activity , phosphocreatine and adenine nucleotides contents in addition to cytochrome c , Bcl2 , Bax and caspase 3 expression .
Moreover , mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation capacity , creatine kinase activity and oxidative stress markers were measured together with the examination of DNA fragmentation and ultrastructural changes .
Nicorandil was effective in alleviating the decrement of heart rate and aortic blood flow and the state of mitochondrial oxidative stress induced by doxorubicin cardiotoxicity .
Nicorandil also preserved phosphocreatine and adenine nucleotides contents by restoring mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation capacity and creatine kinase activity .
Moreover , nicorandil provided a significant cardioprotection via inhibition of apoptotic signaling pathway , DNA fragmentation and mitochondrial ultrastructural changes .
Interestingly , nicorandil did not interfere with cytotoxic effect of doxorubicin against the growth of solid Ehrlich carcinoma .
In conclusion , nicorandil was effective against the development of doxorubicin-induced heart failure in rats as indicated by improvement of hemodynamic perturbations , mitochondrial dysfunction and ultrastructural changes without affecting its antitumor activity .
Relation between preoperative renal dysfunction and cardiovascular events ( stroke , myocardial infarction , or heart failure or death ) within three months of isolated coronary artery bypass grafting .
Renal dysfunction is related to long-term mortality and myocardial infarction after coronary artery bypass grafting ( CABG ) .
We aimed to investigate the association between preoperative renal dysfunction and early risk of stroke , myocardial infarction , or heart failure after CABG .
From the Swedish Web-system for Enhancement and Development of Evidence-based care in Heart disease Evaluated According to Recommended Therapies registry , we included all 36,284 patients who underwent primary isolated CABG from 2000 to 2008 in Sweden .
The Swedish National Inpatient Registry was used to obtain the primary end point , which was rehospitalization for stroke , myocardial infarction , or heart failure ≤ 90 days after CABG .
Logistic regression models were used to estimate the risk for the primary outcome and the secondary outcome of death from any cause , while adjusting for confounders .
During 90 days of follow-up , there were 2,462 cardiovascular events and 617 deaths .
In total , 17 % of patients developed acute kidney injury postoperatively .
Odds ratios with 95 % confidence intervals for cardiovascular events after adjustment for age , gender , atrial fibrillation , left ventricular ejection fraction , diabetes mellitus , peripheral vascular disease , and history of myocardial infarction , heart failure , or stroke was 1.24 ( 1.06 to 1.45 ) in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 15 to 45 ml / min / 1.73 m ( 2 ) but became nonsignificant after acute kidney injury was introduced into the statistical model .
The risk of death was significantly increased in patients with estimated glomerular filtration rate of 15 to 45 ml / min / 1.73 m ( 2 ) ( odds ratio 1.76 , 95 % confidence interval 1.38 to 2.25 ) even after adjustment for all confounders .
Renal dysfunction was associated with all-cause mortality but not with cardiovascular events during the first 3 postoperative months after primary isolated CABG .
Heart failure in the young .
Heart failure is an enormous clinical burden in adult medicine , largely because of the prevalence of atheromatous coronary disease .
In children , where coronary disease is not the leading cause of heart failure , it is less common .
It is , however , an important disease , accounting for 10 % of paediatric cardiac transplants in children .
Cardiac symptoms in children are usually the result of congenital lesions .
Most of these lesions , such as septal defects , are amenable to surgical intervention .
It is not appropriate to expand on the management of congenital heart lesions in this review .
There is a small subgroup of children that have diastolic failure from cardiomyopathic restriction to flow .
The remaining patients , which will be focused on below , have heart failure that is principally related to poor myocardial function and largely comprise those children with dilated poorly contracting ventricles , which can be related to specific aetiologies in some cases .
Particular topics of debate in paediatric heart failure concern : the diagnosis and management of myocarditis versus dilated cardiomyopathy the most appropriate investigations for new onset heart failure cellular responses to heart failure the increasing population of anthracycline treated survivors of childhood malignant disease treatment strategies .
Key role of ERK1 / 2 molecular scaffolds in heart pathology .
The ability of cardiomyocytes to detect mechanical and humoral stimuli is critical for adaptation of the myocardium in response to new conditions and for sustaining the increased workload during stress .
While certain stimuli mediate a beneficial adaptation to stress conditions , others result in maladaptive remodelling , ultimately leading to heart failure .
Specific signalling pathways activating either adaptive or maladaptive cardiac remodelling have been identified .
Paradoxically , however , in a number of cases , the transduction pathways involved in such opposing responses engage the same signalling proteins .
A notable example is the Raf-MEK1 / 2-ERK1 / 2 signalling pathway that can control both adaptive and maladaptive remodelling .
ERK1 / 2 signalling requires a signalosome complex where a scaffold protein drives the assembly of these three kinases into a linear pathway to facilitate their sequential phosphorylation , ultimately targeting specific effector molecules .
Interestingly , a number of different Raf-MEK1 / 2-ERK1 / 2 scaffold proteins have been identified , and their role in determining the adaptive or maladaptive cardiac remodelling is a promising field of investigation for the development of therapeutic strategies capable of selectively potentiating the adaptive response .
Cardiac amyloidosis , about an atypical case .
The described report deals with the case of a patient with diagnosis of ischemic-hypertensive cardiomyiopathy based on the history of angina and inducible myocardial ischemia with normal coronary arteries .
However , after cardiac magnetic resonance , the typical amyloidotic pattern is found and the final diagnosis of multiple myeloma is made at osteomedullary biopsy .
Measuring frailty in heart failure : a community perspective .
BACKGROUND : Frailty , an important prognostic indicator in heart failure ( HF ) , may be defined as a biological phenotype or an accumulation of deficits .
Each method has strengths and limitations , but their utility has never been evaluated in the same community HF cohort .
METHODS : Southeastern Minnesota residents with HF were recruited from 2007 to 2011 .
Frailty according to the biological phenotype was defined as 3 or more of : weak grip strength , physical exhaustion , slowness , low activity and unintentional weight loss &gt; 10 lb in 1 year .
Intermediate frailty was defined as 1 to 2 .
The deficit index was defined as the proportion of deficits present out of 32 deficits .
RESULTS : Among 223 patients ( mean age 71 ± 14 , 61 % male ) , 21 % were frail and 48 % intermediate frail according to the biological phenotype .
The deficit index ranged from 0.02-0.75 , with a mean ( SD ) of 0.25 ( 0.13 ) .
Over a mean follow-up of 2.4 years , 63 patients died .
After adjustment for age , sex and ejection fraction , patients categorized as frail by the biological phenotype had a 2-fold increased risk of death compared to those with no frailty , whereas a 0.1 unit increase in the deficit index was associated with a 44 % increased risk of death .
Both measures predicted death equally ( C-statistics : 0.687 for biological phenotype and 0.700 for deficit index ) .
CONCLUSION : The deficit index and the biological phenotype equally predict mortality .
As the biological phenotype is not routinely assessed clinically , the deficit index , which can be ascertained from medical records , is a feasible alternative to ascertain frailty .
Learning from recent trials and shaping the future of acute heart failure trials .
The last decade of acute heart failure ( HF ) research is characterized by disappointments in large phase 2 and 3 pharmacologic studies of therapeutics including calcium-sensitizing agents and antagonists of endothelin , vasopressin , and adenosine .
As a result , pharmacologic management for acute HF has changed little in recent years , and adverse event rates remain higher than in chronic HF .
Despite neutral results in many acute HF trials , recent studies including RELAX-AHF , ASTRONAUT , and PRONTO have highlighted the role of appropriate timing of patient enrollment , targeting the &quot; right &quot; patients , and selecting appropriate end points and sites .
We describe lessons learned from recent trials in acute HF and outline strategies to improve the potential for success in future trials .
Measurement of natriuretic peptides at the point of care in the emergency and ambulatory setting : current status and future perspectives .
The measurement of natriuretic peptides ( NPs ) , B-type NP or N-terminal pro-B-type NP , can be an important tool in the diagnosis of acute heart failure in patients presenting to an Emergency Department ( ED ) with acute dyspnea , according to international guidelines .
Studies and subsequent meta-analyses are mixed on the absolute value of routine NP assessment of ED patients .
However , levels of NPs are likely to be used also to guide treatment and to assess risk of adverse outcomes in other patients at risk of developing heart failure , including those with pulmonary embolism or diabetes , or receiving chemotherapy .
Natriuretic peptide levels , like other biomarkers , can now be measured at the point of care ( POC ) .
We have reviewed the current status of NP measurement together with the potential contribution of POC measurement of NPs to clinical care delivery in the emergency and other settings .
Several POC systems for measuring NP levels are now available : these produce test results within 15 minutes and appear sufficiently sensitive and robust to be used routinely in diagnostic evaluations .
Point-of-care systems could be used to assess NP levels in the ED and community outpatient settings to monitor the risk of acute heart failure .
Furthermore , the use of protocol-driven POC testing of NP within the time frame of a patient consultation in the ED may facilitate and accelerate the throughput and disposition of at-risk patients .
Appropriately designed clinical trials will be needed to confirm these potential benefits .
It is also important that processes of care delivery are redesigned to take full advantage of the faster turnaround times provided by POC technology .
Measuring heart failure care by 30-day readmission : Rethinking the quality of outcome measures .
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) has operationalized hospital quality of care outcomes through publicly reported 30-day risk-standardized mortality and readmission rates and associated penalties for higher-than-expected rates .
The objective of the measure is to motivate hospitals to improve the quality of care they provide patients hospitalized for heart failure ( HF ) and other conditions such as acute myocardial infarction , pneumonia , with expected future expansion to other conditions .
Cardiology : Bromodomain inhibition halts heart failure .
Heart failure ( HF ) is the leading cause of mortality in modern society .
It is a consequence of pathological remodelling of the heart , which involves cardiac hypertrophy ( a robust predictor of subsequent HF and death ) , fibrosis and inflammation .
At the molecular level , HF has been associated with chromatin hyperacetylation .
Now , reporting in Cell , Anand et al .
show that the BET family bromodomain proteins ( BETs ) , a family of acetyl-lysine reader proteins , are central to HF pathogenesis and that they are promising targets for the prevention of HF .
The remodelling that precedes HF is induced by haemodynamic and neuronal stressors .
These activate a signal transduction cascade that converges on a defined set of transcription factors , and pathological changes in cardiomyocytes occur through an interplay between these transcription factors and epigenetic changes in chromatin structure .
Both epigenetic &apos; writer &apos; proteins ( histone acetyltransferases ) and epigenetic &apos; erasers &apos; ( histone deacetylases ) have been implicated in cardiac development and disease .
However , the role of &apos; readers &apos; ( bromodomain proteins ) was less well defined .
The group utilized the recently developed first-in-class inhibitor JQ1 , which displaces BETs from chromatin , resulting in the suppression of downstream signalling to RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) .
Investigating the role of BETs in an in vitro model of neurohormonally induced heart disease , the authors showed that nanomolar doses of JQ1 significantly blocked phenylephrine-mediated hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes and pathological gene induction .
Similar results were achieved through knockdown of the BET bromodomain-containing protein 4 ( BRD4 ) , which is highly expressed in cardiac tissues .
Gene expression profiling of cultured cardiomyocytes in the presence or absence of JQ1 showed that the drug abrogated the induction of a substantial subset of phenylephrine-induced genes .
In vivo experiments of HF induced in mice via phenylephrine or haemodynamic stress ( using the surgical method of transverse aortic constriction ( TAC ) ) showed that JQ1 protected against several pathological changes , including cardiac hypertrophy .
Importantly , no toxicity or effects on systemic blood pressure were observed .
Detailed transcriptional analysis of cardiac tissue from mice that were either TAC- or sham-operated and treated with either JQ1 or vehicle revealed that BET inhibition suppresses a pathological cardiac gene expression programme .
Importantly , the targets of BETs in the mouse TAC model were also found to be relevant in human HF .
Further molecular analysis revealed that BETs play a crucial role in chromatin-mediated signal transduction to Pol II , co-activating transcription factor networks that are known to be causal in HF pathogenesis , including nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) , nuclear factor-κB ( NF-κB ) and the transcription factor GATA4 .
Moreover , BETs were found to function , in part , by promoting transcriptional pause release ( and thereby re-activating transcription ) during pathological stress .
This study implicates epigenetic readers in cardiac biology and suggests that the manipulation of cardiac gene control via the targeting of chromatin-dependent signal transduction could potentially abrogate pathological gene expression and HF progression .
Multiacquisition T1-mapping MRI during tidal respiration for quantification of myocardial T1 in swine with heart failure .
OBJECTIVE : The purpose of this article is to evaluate a free-breathing pulse sequence to quantify myocardial T1 changes in a swine model of tachycardia-induced heart failure .
MATERIALS AND METHODS : Yorkshire swine were implanted with pacemakers and were ventricularly paced at 200 beats / min to induce heart failure .
Animals were scanned twice with a 1.5-T MRI scanner , once at baseline and once at heart failure .
A T1-mapping sequence was performed during tidal respiration before and 5 minutes after the administration of a gadolinium-chelate contrast agent .
T1-mapping values were compared between the baseline and heart failure scans .
The percentage of fibrosis of heart failure myocardial tissue was compared with similar left ventricular tissue from control animals using trichrome blue histologic analysis .
RESULTS : In the study cohort , differences were found between the baseline and heart failure T1-mapping values before the administration of contrast agent ( 960 ± 96 and 726 ± 94 ms , respectively ; p = 0.02 ) and after contrast agent administration ( 546 ± 180 and 300 ± 171 ms , respectively ; p = 0.005 ) .
The animals with heart failure also had a difference histologically in the percentage of myocardial collagen compared with tissue from healthy control animals ( control , 5.4 % ± 1.0 % ; heart failure , 9.4 % ± 1.6 % ; p &lt; 0.001 ) .
CONCLUSION : The proposed T1-mapping technique can quantify diffuse myocardial changes associated with heart failure without the use of a contrast agent and without breath-holding .
These T1 changes appear to be associated with increases in the percentage of myocardial collagen that in this study were not detected by traditional myocardial delayed enhancement imaging .
T1 mapping may be a useful technique for detecting early but clinically significant myocardial fibrosis .
Assessment and prognostic relevance of right ventricular contractile reserve in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension .
BACKGROUND : This study sought to analyze a new approach to assess exercise-induced pulmonary artery systolic pressure ( PASP ) increase by means of stress Doppler echocardiography as a possible measure of right ventricular contractile reserve in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure .
METHODS AND RESULTS : In this prospective study , patients with invasively diagnosed pulmonary arterial hypertension or inoperable chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension and impaired right ventricular pump function despite a stable targeted pulmonary arterial hypertension medication underwent a broad panel of noninvasive assessments , including stress echocardiography and cardiopulmonary exercise testing .
On the basis of the assumption that exercise-induced PASP is a measure of right ventricular contractile reserve , patients were classified into 2 groups according to an exercise-induced PASP increase above or below the median .
Patients were followed up for 3.0 ± 1.8 years .
Univariate and multivariate analyses were used for factors predicting survival .
Of 124 patients , 66 were below the median exercise-induced PASP increase of 30 mm Hg ( low PASP ) , and 58 patients were above the median ( high PASP ) .
These groups were not significantly different in terms of medication and resting hemodynamics .
Low PASP was associated with a significantly lower 6-minute walking distance , peak o2 per kilogram , and 1- , 3- , and 4-year survival rates ( 92 % , 69 % , and 48 % , respectively , versus 96 % , 92 % , and 89 % ) .
In the multivariate Cox model analysis adjusted for age and sex , PASP increase during exercise and peak o2 per kilogram remained independent prognostic markers ( hazard ratio , 2.56 for peak o2 per kilogram and 2.84 for PASP increase ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Exercise-induced PASP increase is of high clinical and prognostic relevance in pulmonary hypertension patients and may indicate right ventricular contractile reserve .
Stress Doppler echocardiography may be a useful tool for prognostic assessment in pulmonary hypertension patients .
Contemporary use of devices in heart failure .
Devices have become a cornerstone of heart failure ( HF ) therapy .
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators ( ICDs ) decrease mortality , and cardiac resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) improves symptoms and mortality .
Most data have been collected in patients with systolic dysfunction .
Data in patients with preserved systolic function are scarce , but interesting therapeutic concepts are evolving .
Besides therapeutic functions , devices can have add-on diagnostic features such as early detection of fluid overload .
In addition , stand-alone diagnostic devices are now also being developed for HF .
Unfolded protein response regulates cardiac sodium current in systolic human heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Human heart failure ( HF ) increases alternative mRNA splicing of the type V , voltage-gated cardiac Na + channel α-subunit ( SCN5A ) , generating variants encoding truncated , nonfunctional channels that are trapped in the endoplasmic reticulum .
In this work , we tested whether truncated Na + channels activate the unfolded protein response ( UPR ) , contributing to SCN5A electric remodeling in HF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : UPR and SCN5A were analyzed in human ventricular systolic HF tissue samples and human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes ( hiPSC-CMs ) .
Cells were exposed to angiotensin II ( AngII ) and hypoxia , known activators of abnormal SCN5A mRNA splicing , or were induced to overexpress SCN5A variants .
UPR effectors , protein kinase R-like ER kinase ( PERK ) , calreticulin , and CHOP , were increased in human HF tissues .
Induction of SCN5A variants with AngII or hypoxia or the expression of exogenous variants induced the UPR with concomitant downregulation of Na + current .
PERK activation destabilized SCN5A and , surprisingly , Kv4.3 channel mRNAs but not transient receptor potential cation channel M7 ( TRPM7 ) channel mRNA .
PERK inhibition prevented the loss of full-length SCN5A and Kv4.3 mRNA levels resulting from expressing Na + channel mRNA splice variants .
CONCLUSIONS : UPR can be initiated by Na + channel mRNA splice variants and is involved in the reduction of cardiac Na + current during human HF .
Because the effect is not entirely specific to the SCN5A transcript , the UPR may play an important role in downregulation of multiple cardiac genes in HF .
Acute right heart failure in pulmonary hypertension .
The right ventricle ( RV ) is integral to normal cardiac function , but receives little attention in the medical literature .
The etiologic causes of acute RV failure often differ from those encountered in left ventricular dysfunction .
Thus , RV failure frequently requires diagnostic procedures and management strategies that differ from those routinely used in the management of intrinsic left ventricular dysfunction .
In this summary , the structure and function of the RV will be reviewed , concentrating on the pathophysiologic mechanisms behind the development of RV dysfunction .
We will then focus on two distinct populations of patients who are at risk for acute RV failure : those with chronic pulmonary arterial hypertension ( PAH ) and those with acute pulmonary embolism .
In chronic PAH , we will examine clinical circumstances common to hospitalized patients that may provoke acute RV decompensation , as well as pharmacologic therapies that are unique to RV failure management in PAH .
Individuals with acute RV failure in the setting of pulmonary embolism represent a group with particularly high mortality , and the specific diagnostic and management strategies that are important for improved survival will be discussed .
Contemporary trends in heart failure with reduced and preserved ejection fraction after myocardial infarction : a community study .
Major changes have recently occurred in the epidemiology of myocardial infarction ( MI ) that could possibly affect outcomes such as heart failure ( HF ) .
Data describing trends in HF after MI are scarce and conflicting and do not distinguish between preserved and reduced ejection fraction ( EF ) .
We evaluated temporal trends in HF after MI .
All residents of Olmsted County , Minnesota ( n = 2,596 ) who had a first-ever MI diagnosed in 1990-2010 and no prior HF were followed-up through 2012 .
Framingham Heart Study criteria were used to define HF , which was further classified according to EF .
Both early-onset ( 0-7 days after MI ) and late-onset ( 8 days to 5 years after MI ) HF were examined .
Changes in patient presentation were noted , including fewer ST-segment-elevation MIs , lower Killip class , and more comorbid conditions .
Over the 5-year follow-up period , 715 patients developed HF , 475 of whom developed it during the first week .
The age- and sex-adjusted risk declined from 1990-1996 to 2004-2010 , with hazard ratios of 0.67 ( 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) : 0.54 , 0.85 ) for early-onset HF and 0.63 ( 95 % CI : 0.45 , 0.86 ) for late-onset HF .
Further adjustment for patient and MI characteristics yielded hazard ratios of 0.86 ( 95 % CI : 0.66 , 1.11 ) and 0.63 ( 95 % CI : 0.45 , 0.88 ) for early- and late-onset HF , respectively .
Declines in early-onset and late-onset HF were observed for HF with reduced EF ( &lt; 50 % ) but not for HF with preserved EF , indicating a change in the case mix of HF after MI that requires new prevention strategies .
Differential effects of nonselective versus selective beta-blockers on cardiac sympathetic activity and hemostasis in patients with heart failure .
Carvedilol , a nonselective β-blocker , may be more effective than the selective β-blocker metoprolol in reducing the risk of thromboembolic events in heart failure .
The aim of this study was , first , to assess whether there is a differential response in cardiac sympathetic activity by ( 123 ) I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine ( ( 123 ) I-MIBG ) imaging when either β-blocker is used .
Second , we assessed whether that response correlates with levels of various serum factors that serve as markers for coagulability .
METHODS : In this prospective , randomized , open-label crossover study with masked outcome assessments , stable heart failure patients ( left ventricular ejection fraction &lt; 40 % ) homozygous for the Arg16 / Gln27 ( n = 13 ) or Gly16 / Glu27 haplotype ( n = 8 ) of the β2-receptor were randomized to equipotent dosages of carvedilol or metoprolol for two 6-wk periods .
Primary outcome was sympathetic activity as measured by ( 123 ) I-MIBG myocardial washout .
Secondary outcomes included markers of hemostasis .
RESULTS : ( 123 ) I-MIBG cardiac washout was lower during carvedilol than metoprolol treatment ( 12.9 % ± 3.9 % vs. 22.1 % ± 2.8 % , respectively , P = 0.003 ) , irrespective of β2-adrenergic receptor haplotype .
In addition , treatment with carvedilol resulted in a lower von Willebrand factor than did metoprolol ( 149 % ± 13 % vs. 157 % ± 13 % , respectively , P = 0.01 ) , irrespective of β2-adrenergic receptor haplotype .
CONCLUSION : Compared with metoprolol , carvedilol resulted in greater reduction of sympathetic activity after 6 wk of treatment and lower von Willebrand factor concentrations in both Arg16 / Gln27 and Gly16 / Glu27 individuals .
Therefore , carvedilol may reduce the risk of thromboembolic events in patients with heart failure , irrespective of β2-receptor haplotype status .
Reasons for not prescribing guideline-recommended medications to adults with heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Little is known about how often contextual factors such as patient preferences and competing priorities impact prescribing of guideline-recommended medications , or about the extent to which these factors are documented in medical records and available to performance measurement systems .
METHODS : Mixed-methods study of 295 veterans aged 50 years and older in 4 VA health care systems who had systolic heart failure and were not prescribed a β-blocker and / or an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin-receptor blocker .
Reasons for nontreatment were identified from clinic notes and from interviews with 62 primary care clinicians caring for these patients .
These reasons were classified using a published taxonomy .
RESULTS : Among 295 patients not receiving guideline-recommended drugs for heart failure , chart review identified biomedical reasons for nonprescribing in 42 % -58 % of patients and contextual reasons in 11 % -17 % .
Clinician interviews identified twice as many reasons for nonprescribing as chart review ( mean 1.6 vs. 0.8 reasons per patient , P &lt; 0.001 ) .
In these interviews , biomedical reasons for nonprescribing were cited in 50 % -70 % of patients , and contextual reasons in 64 % -70 % .
The most common contextual reasons were comanagement with other clinicians ( 32 % -35 % of patients ) , patient preferences and nonadherence ( 15 % -24 % ) , and clinician belief that the medication is not indicated in the patient ( 12 % -20 % ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Contextual reasons for not prescribing angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor / angiotensin-receptor blockers and β-blockers are present in two thirds of patients with heart failure who did not receive these medications , yet are poorly documented in medical records .
The structure of medical records should be improved to facilitate documentation of contextual reasons for not providing guideline-recommended care .
Increase in parasympathetic tone by pyridostigmine prevents ventricular dysfunction during the onset of heart failure .
Heart failure ( HF ) is characterized by elevated sympathetic activity and reduced parasympathetic control of the heart .
Experimental evidence suggests that the increase in parasympathetic function can be a therapeutic alternative to slow HF evolution .
The parasympathetic neurotransmission can be improved by acetylcholinesterase inhibition .
We investigated the long-term ( 4 wk ) effects of the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor pyridostigmine on sympathovagal balance , cardiac remodeling , and cardiac function in the onset of HF following myocardial infarction .
Myocardial infarction was elicited in adult male Wistar rats .
After 4 wk of pyridostigmine administration , per os , methylatropine and propranolol were used to evaluate the cardiac sympathovagal balance .
The tachycardic response caused by methylatropine was considered to be the vagal tone , whereas the bradycardic response caused by propranolol was considered to be the sympathetic tone .
In conscious HF rats , pyridostigmine reduced the basal heart rate , increased vagal , and reduced sympathetic control of heart rate .
Pyridostigmine reduced the myocyte diameter and collagen density of the surviving left ventricle .
Pyridostigmine also increased vascular endothelial growth factor protein in the left ventricle , suggesting myocardial angiogenesis .
Cardiac function was assessed by means of the pressure-volume conductance catheter system .
HF rats treated with pyridostigmine exhibited a higher stroke volume , ejection fraction , cardiac output , and contractility of the left ventricle .
It was demonstrated that the long-term administration of pyridostigmine started right after coronary artery ligation augmented cardiac vagal and reduced sympathetic tone , attenuating cardiac remodeling and left ventricular dysfunction during the progression of HF in rats .
Mechanistic insight into prolonged electromechanical delay in dyssynchronous heart failure : a computational study .
In addition to the left bundle branch block type of electrical activation , there are further remodeling aspects associated with dyssynchronous heart failure ( HF ) that affect the electromechanical behavior of the heart .
Among the most important are altered ventricular structure ( both geometry and fiber / sheet orientation ) , abnormal Ca ( 2 + ) handling , slowed conduction , and reduced wall stiffness .
In dyssynchronous HF , the electromechanical delay ( EMD ) , the time interval between local myocyte depolarization and myofiber shortening onset , is prolonged .
However , the contributions of the four major HF remodeling aspects in extending EMD in the dyssynchronous failing heart remain unknown .
The goal of this study was to determine the individual and combined contributions of HF-induced remodeling aspects to EMD prolongation .
We used MRI-based models of dyssynchronous nonfailing and HF canine electromechanics and constructed additional models in which varying combinations of the four remodeling aspects were represented .
A left bundle branch block electrical activation sequence was simulated in all models .
The simulation results revealed that deranged Ca ( 2 + ) handling is the primary culprit in extending EMD in dyssynchronous HF , with the other aspects of remodeling contributing insignificantly .
Mechanistically , we found that abnormal Ca ( 2 + ) handling in dyssynchronous HF slows myofiber shortening velocity at the early-activated septum and depresses both myofiber shortening and stretch rate at the late-activated lateral wall .
These changes in myofiber dynamics delay the onset of myofiber shortening , thus giving rise to prolonged EMD in dyssynchronous HF .
Relationships between right ventricular function , body composition , and prognosis in advanced heart failure .
OBJECTIVES : This study sought to examine the relationships between right ventricular ( RV ) function , body composition , and prognosis in patients with advanced heart failure ( HF ) .
BACKGROUND : Previous studies investigating HF-related cachexia have not examined the impact of RV function on body composition .
We hypothesized that RV dysfunction is linked to weight loss , abnormal body composition , and worsened prognosis in advanced HF .
METHODS : Subjects with advanced HF ( n = 408 ) underwent prospective assessment of body composition ( skinfold thickness , dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry ) , comprehensive echocardiography , and blood testing .
Subjects were followed up for adverse events ( defined as death , transplantation , or circulatory assist device ) .
RESULTS : Subjects with RV dysfunction ( 51 % ) had lower body mass index , lower fat mass index , and were more likely to display cachexia ( 19 % ) .
The extent of RV dysfunction correlated with greater antecedent weight loss and a lower fat / lean body mass ratio .
Over a median follow-up of 541 days , there were 150 events ( 37 % ) .
Risk of event was greater in subjects with RV dysfunction ( hazard ratio : 3.09 &#91; 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) : 2.18 to 4.45 &#93; ) and cachexia ( hazard ratio : 2.90 &#91; 95 % CI : 2.00 to 4.12 &#93; ) in univariate and multivariate analyses .
Increased body mass index was associated with a lower event rate ( HR per kg / m ( 2 ) : 0.92 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.88 to 0.96 &#93; ) , and this protection was mediated by a higher fat mass ( 0.91 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.87 to 0.96 &#93; ) but not a fat-free mass index ( 0.97 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.92 to 1.03 &#93; ) .
CONCLUSIONS : RV dysfunction and cardiac cachexia often coexist , have additive adverse impact , and might be mechanistically interrelated .
Wasting of fat but not of lean mass was predictive of adverse outcome , suggesting that fat loss is either a surrogate of enhanced catabolism or adipose tissue is cardioprotective in the context of HF .
Effect of If-channel inhibition on hemodynamic status and exercise tolerance in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction : a randomized trial .
OBJECTIVES : The aim of this study was to test the effects of treatment with ivabradine on exercise capacity and left ventricular filling in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) .
BACKGROUND : Because symptoms of HFpEF are typically exertional , optimization of diastolic filling time by controlling heart rate may delay the onset of symptoms .
METHODS : Sixty-one patients with HFpEF were randomly assigned to ivabradine 5 mg twice daily ( n = 30 ) or placebo ( n = 31 ) for 7 days in this double-blind trial .
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing with echocardiographic assessment of myocardial function and left ventricular filling were undertaken at rest and after exercise .
RESULTS : The ivabradine group demonstrated significant improvement between baseline and follow-up exercise capacity ( 4.2 ± 1.8 METs vs. 5.7 ± 1.9 METs , p = 0.001 ) and peak oxygen uptake ( 14.0 ± 6.1 ml / min / kg vs. 17.0 ± 3.3 ml / min / kg , p = 0.001 ) , with simultaneous reduction in exercise-induced increase in the ratio of peak early diastolic mitral flow velocity to peak early diastolic mitral annular velocity ( 3.1 ± 2.7 vs. 1.3 ± 2.0 , p = 0.004 ) .
Work load-corrected chronotropic response ( the difference in heart rate at the same exercise time at the baseline and follow-up tests ) showed a slower increase in heart rate during exercise than in the placebo-treated group .
Therapy with ivabradine ( β = 0.34 , p = 0.04 ) and change with treatment in exertional increase in the ratio of peak early diastolic mitral flow velocity to peak early diastolic mitral annular velocity ( β = -0.30 , p = 0.02 ) were independent correlates of increase in exercise capacity , and therapy with ivabradine ( β = 0.32 , p = 0.007 ) was independently correlated with increase in peak oxygen uptake .
CONCLUSIONS : In patients with HFpEF , short-term treatment with ivabradine increased exercise capacity , with a contribution from improved left ventricular filling pressure response to exercise as reflected by the ratio of peak early diastolic mitral flow velocity to peak early diastolic mitral annular velocity .
Because this patient population is symptomatic on exertion , therapeutic treatments targeting abnormal exercise hemodynamic status may prove useful .
( Use of Exercise and Medical Therapies to Improve Cardiac Function Among Patients With Exertional Shortness of Breath Due to Lung Congestion ; ACTRN12610001087044 ) .
A simple validated clinical tool to predict the absence of coronary artery disease in patients with systolic heart failure of unclear etiology .
Coronary artery disease ( CAD ) is a major cause of systolic heart failure ( HF ) .
Identifying CAD as a cause of systolic HF has prognostic and treatment implications .
Whether all patients with systolic HF of unclear etiology should undergo coronary angiography has been controversial .
We sought to derive and validate a clinical prediction rule to exclude CAD as a cause of systolic HF .
A derivation cohort was formed of consecutive patients who had undergone coronary angiography with a primary diagnosis of systolic HF of unclear etiology ( ejection fraction &lt; 50 % ) .
Using multivariate logistic regression analysis , we derived a prediction rule for severe CAD ( ≥ 50 % diameter stenosis in the left main , 3-vessel CAD , and 2-vessel CAD involving the proximal left anterior descending artery ) .
The diagnostic performance of the defined prediction rule was prospectively validated in a separate cohort recruited from 2 institutions .
Of the 124 patients in the derivation cohort , 27 % had CAD , including 15 % with severe CAD .
The independent predictors of severe CAD included diabetes ( odds ratio 5.1 , p = 0.005 ) , electrocardiographic Q waves or left bundle branch block ( odds ratio 3.8 , p = 0.02 ) , and ≥ 2 nondiabetes risk factors : age ( men ≥ 55 or women ≥ 65 years ) , dyslipidemia , hypertension , and tobacco use ( odds ratio 4.8 , p = 0.02 ) .
A prediction rule of having ≥ 1 independent predictor identified 97 % of the patients with CAD and 100 % of the patients with severe CAD .
In the prospective validation cohort of 143 patients , the prediction rule had 98 % sensitivity and 18 % specificity for CAD but 100 % sensitivity for severe CAD .
In conclusion , a simple clinical prediction rule can accurately identify patients with CAD and eliminate the need for angiography in a substantial proportion of patients with systolic HF , with potentially significant cost savings and risk avoidance .
Experience of a vasopressin receptor antagonist , tolvaptan , under the unique indication in Japanese heart failure patients .
Tolvaptan is a vasopressin type 2 receptor antagonist .
Currently , tolvaptan is indicated for the treatment of severe hyponatremia in most countries , including the United States , but in Japan the indication is broader ; it can be used in congestive heart failure patients in addition to standard or optimal diuretic therapy , regardless of their serum sodium levels or systolic function .
Our review of this newly introduced drug is based on our experience in Japan .
Diuretic use in heart failure and outcomes .
Diuretics are frequently administered to relieve congestive symptoms in patients with heart failure ( HF ) .
Despite their widespread use , prospective data on the potential of diuretics to modulate HF-related morbidity and mortality are scarce .
Diuretic efficacy may be limited by adverse neurohormonal activation and by &quot; congestion-like &quot; symptoms that may occur in the absence of fluid overload .
Herein , we review the current knowledge on diuretic use and outcomes in HF .
The high-risk patient with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction : treatment options and challenges .
An estimated 5.1 million Americans aged 20 years and older have heart failure .
( 1 ) With therapies ranging from medication and physical therapy to implantable defibrillators and circulatory support , and possibly transplantation , accurate risk stratification of patient with heart failure and delivery of therapies appropriate to the level of their disease severity is becoming increasingly important .
Determination of risk and associated treatment strategies is the subject of this brief review .
Phosphodiesterase-2 is up-regulated in human failing hearts and blunts beta-adrenergic responses in cardiomyocytes .
OBJECTIVES : This study investigated whether myocardial phosphodiesterase-2 ( PDE2 ) is altered in heart failure ( HF ) and determined PDE2-mediated effects on beta-adrenergic receptor ( β-AR ) signaling in healthy and diseased cardiomyocytes .
BACKGROUND : Diminished cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) and augmented cyclic guanosine monophosphate ( cGMP ) signaling is characteristic for failing hearts .
Among the PDE superfamily , PDE2 has the unique property of being able to be stimulated by cGMP , thus leading to a remarkable increase in cAMP hydrolysis mediating a negative cross talk between cGMP and cAMP signaling .
However , the role of PDE2 in HF is poorly understood .
METHODS : Immunoblotting , radioenzymatic- and fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based assays , video edge detection , epifluorescence microscopy , and L-type Ca2 ( + ) current measurements were performed in myocardial tissues and / or isolated cardiomyocytes from human and / or experimental HF , respectively .
RESULTS : Myocardial PDE2 expression and activity were ~ 2-fold higher in advanced human HF .
Chronic β-AR stimulation via catecholamine infusions in rats enhanced PDE2 expression ~ 2-fold and cAMP hydrolytic activity ~ 4-fold , which correlated with blunted cardiac β-AR responsiveness .
In diseased cardiomyocytes , higher PDE2 activity could be further enhanced by stimulation of cGMP synthesis via nitric oxide donors , whereas specific PDE2 inhibition partially restored β-AR responsiveness .
Accordingly , PDE2 overexpression in healthy cardiomyocytes reduced the rise in cAMP levels and L-type Ca2 ( + ) current amplitude , and abolished the inotropic effect following acute β-AR stimulation , without affecting basal contractility .
Importantly , PDE2-overexpressing cardiomyocytes showed marked protection from norepinephrine-induced hypertrophic responses .
CONCLUSIONS : PDE2 is markedly up-regulated in failing hearts and desensitizes against acute β-AR stimulation .
This may constitute an important defense mechanism during cardiac stress , for example , by antagonizing excessive β-AR drive .
Thus , activating myocardial PDE2 may represent a novel intracellular antiadrenergic therapeutic strategy in HF .
Safety and efficacy of eplerenone in patients at high risk for hyperkalemia and / or worsening renal function : analyses of the EMPHASIS-HF study subgroups ( Eplerenone in Mild Patients Hospitalization And SurvIval Study in Heart Failure ) .
OBJECTIVES : The study sought to investigate the safety and efficacy of eplerenone in patients at high risk for hyperkalemia or worsening renal function ( WRF ) in EMPHASIS-HF , a trial that enrolled patients at least 55 years old with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction ( HF-REF ) , in New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) functional class II and with an estimated glomerular filtration rate ( eGFR ) &gt; 30 ml / min / 1.73 m ( 2 ) and serum potassium &lt; 5.0 mmol / l .
Patients were receiving optimal therapy and most had been hospitalized for a cardiovascular reason within 180 days of inclusion .
BACKGROUND : Underuse of eplerenone in patients with HF-REF may be due to fear of inducing hyperkalemia or WRF in high-risk patients .
METHODS : This was a pre-specified analysis of subgroups of patients at high risk of hyperkalemia or WRF ( patients ≥ 75 years of age , with diabetes , with eGFR &lt; 60 ml / min / 1.73 m ( 2 ) , and with systolic blood pressure &lt; median of 123 mm Hg ) , examining the major safety measures ( potassium &gt; 5.5 , &gt; 6.0 , and &lt; 3.5 mmol / l ; hyperkalemia leading to study-drug discontinuation or hospitalization ; and hospitalization for WRF ) as well as the primary outcome ( hospitalization for HF or cardiovascular mortality ) .
RESULTS : In all high-risk subgroups , patients treated with eplerenone had an increased risk of potassium &gt; 5.5 mmol / l but not of potassium &gt; 6.0 mmol / l , and of hospitalization for hyperkalemia or discontinuation of study medication due to adverse events .
Eplerenone was effective in reducing the primary composite endpoint in all subgroups .
CONCLUSIONS : In patients with chronic HF-REF , in NYHA functional class II , and meeting specific inclusion and exclusion criteria , including an eGFR &gt; 30 ml / min / 1.73 m ( 2 ) and potassium &lt; 5.0 mmol / l , eplerenone was both efficacious and safe when carefully monitored , even in subgroups at high risk of developing hyperkalemia or WRF .
( A Comparison Of Outcomes In Patients In New York Heart Association &#91; NYHA &#93; Class II Heart Failure When Treated With Eplerenone Or Placebo In Addition To Standard Heart Failure Medicines &#91; EMPHASIS-HF Study &#93; ; NCT00232180 ) .
Hemoglobin , exercise training , and health status in patients with chronic heart failure ( from the HF-ACTION randomized controlled trial ) .
Anemia is common in patients with chronic heart failure ( HF ) , with a prevalence ranging from 10 % to 56 % , and may be a risk factor for poor outcomes .
Anemia in HF remains poorly understood , with significant gaps in its impact on health-related quality of life ( HRQoL ) , with most studies in HF being retrospective or from registries .
The purpose of this study was to explore the relation of hemoglobin ( Hgb ) with HRQoL and training-induced changes in HRQoL in a cohort of patients in Heart Failure : A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training ( HF-ACTION ) .
Using data from HF-ACTION , a randomized controlled trial of exercise training in patients with HF and low left ventricular ejection fractions , HRQoL was measured using the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire ( KCCQ ) at baseline , 3 and 12 months , and annually up to 4 years .
Treatment group effects on HRQoL were estimated using linear mixed models according to the intention-to-treat principle .
It was hypothesized that baseline Hgb would be correlated with baseline KCCQ scales and that Hgb would moderate the beneficial effect of exercise training on HRQoL .
Hgb level was not significantly correlated with baseline HRQoL .
Baseline Hgb did not moderate the beneficial effect of exercise training on KCCQ overall or subscales relative to usual care .
In conclusion , in the HF-ACTION cohort , there was no correlation with baseline Hgb and baseline HRQoL as measured by the KCCQ .
In addition , the beneficial effects of HRQoL from exercise training were not modulated by baseline Hgb .
Atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure : a cost analysis of rhythm-control vs. rate-control strategies .
BACKGROUND : Atrial fibrillation ( AF ) is common in patients with heart failure .
Rhythm- and rate-control strategies are associated with similar efficacy outcomes .
We compared the economic impact of the 2 treatment strategies in patients with AF and heart failure from the province of Québec , Canada .
METHODS : In a substudy of the Atrial Fibrillation and Congestive Heart Failure trial , health care expenditures of patients from Québec randomized to rhythm and rate-control treatment strategies were compared from a single-payer perspective using a cost-minimization approach .
In-trial resource utilization and unit costs were estimated from Québec Health Insurance Board databases supplemented by disease-specific costs from the Ontario Case Costing Initiative .
RESULTS : In all , 304 patients were included , aged 68 ± 9 years ; 86 % male ; ejection fraction , 26 % ± 6 % .
Baseline characteristics were similar in rhythm-control ( n = 149 ) and rate-control ( n = 155 ) groups .
Arrhythmia-related costs accounted for 45 % of total expenditures .
Rate-control patients had fewer cardiac procedures ( 146 vs. 238 , P &lt; 0.001 ) , driven by fewer cardioversions , and lower costs related to antiarrhythmic drugs ( CAD $ 48 per patient &#91; 95 % confidence interval { CI } , $ 21- $ 96 &#93; vs. $ 1319 per patient &#91; 95 % CI , $ 1124- $ 1522 &#93; ) .
However , these differences were offset by higher expenditures due to hospitalizations for noncardiovascular diagnoses , implantable cardiac arrhythmia devices , and noncardiovascular drugs in the rate-control group .
The total cost per patient was not significantly different between rhythm-control ( $ 72,764 &#91; 95 % CI , $ 61,575- $ 85,145 &#93; ) and rate-control ( $ 78,767 &#91; 95 % CI , $ 67,101- $ 92,139 &#93; ) strategies .
CONCLUSION : In the study population , the therapeutic strategy used to manage AF in patients with severe heart failure appears to have little influence on the overall financial burden , which remains substantial .
Effectiveness of Chinese herbal medicine as an adjunctive treatment for dilated cardiomyopathy in patients with heart failure .
OBJECTIVES : To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of Chinese herbal medicine ( CHM ) as an adjunctive treatment for patients with dilated cardiomyopathy ( DCM ) and heart failure .
DESIGN : Studies on biomedical treatment plus CHM versus biomedical treatment alone in treating patients with DCM and heart failure were retrieved from PubMed and other major databases ( 1980-2011 ) .
Meta-analysis was performed on the overall effects on effective rate , left ventricular ejection fraction , left ventricular diastolic end diameter , and other outcome measures .
RESULTS : Twenty-seven studies with 1887 patients were included .
Compared with biomedical treatment alone , biomedical treatment plus CHM showed significant improvement in effective rate ( relative risk , 1.26 ; 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; , 1.19-1.34 ) , left ventricular ejection fraction ( % ) ( mean difference , 5.88 ; 95 % CI , 3.92-7.85 ) , left ventricular diastolic end diameter ( mm ) ( mean difference , -2.78 ; 95 % CI , -5.15 to -0.42 ) , and other outcome measures .
Most adverse events observed in the studies were not severe and resolved without special treatment .
CONCLUSIONS : This meta-analysis indicated that biomedical treatment plus CHM is more effective than biomedical treatment alone in treating patients with DCM and heart failure .
However , further studies with long-term follow-up , systemic adverse events evaluation , and other ethnic groups are still required to verify the efficacy and safety of CHM as an adjunctive treatment in all patients with DCM and heart failure .
Baseline and 6-Week follow-up levels of PAF and activity of its metabolic enzymes in patients with heart failure and healthy volunteers--a pilot study .
This study aimed at evaluating the changes in platelet-activating factor ( PAF ) and its metabolic enzymes over a 6-week follow-up period in patients with newly diagnosed heart failure ( &#91; HF &#93; n = 12 ) compared with age- , sex- , and BMI-matched apparently healthy volunteers ( n = 10 ) .
The PAF , its key biosynthetic enzymes ( lyso-PAF acetyltransferase &#91; lyso-PAF-AT &#93; and dithiothreitol &#91; DTT &#93; -insensitive CDP choline : 1-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol cholinephosphotransferase &#91; PAF-CPT &#93; ) , and its catabolic isoenzymes ( PAF-acetylhydrolase &#91; PAF-AH &#93; and lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 &#91; Lp-PLA2 &#93; ) were measured in serum and leukocytes of participants .
At baseline , patients with HF had lower median activities of lyso-PAF-AT ( P &lt; .001 ) and PAF-CPT ( P = .07 ) in parallel with PAF levels ( P = .05 ) and higher activities of PAF-AH ( P = .02 ) and Lp-PLA2 ( P &lt; .001 ) than controls .
At follow-up , PAF-CPT and PAF levels marginally increased ( P = .1 ) , lyso-PAF-AT ( P &lt; .001 ) remained downregulated , while PAF-AH ( P = .004 ) and Lp-PLA2 ( P &lt; .001 ) remained elevated compared with the controls .
Newly diagnosed patients with HF under drug treatment have an affected profile of PAF biosynthetic enzymes and especially lyso-PAF-AT .
Exercise intolerance in heart failure : update on exercise parameters for diagnosis , prognosis and therapeutic interventions .
Exercise intolerance is a hallmark feature of chronic heart failure and is associated with poor prognosis .
This review provides an update on cardiopulmonary exercise variables , proven to be prognostically important in heart failure .
Besides the widely accepted peak oxygen consumption ( peak VO2 ) and VEN / VCO2 slope , other exercise variables - exercise oscillatory ventilation ( EOV ) and partial pressure of end-tidal CO2 , ( PETCO2 ) - should gain attention in the interpretation of cardiopulmonary exercise testing .
In addition to prognosis , the pathophysiological origin is also discussed .
Different mechanisms underlie these exercise variables with an important contribution of haemodynamic , pulmonary and peripheral abnormalities .
Given the different pathophysiological origin , a multivariate assessment with the inclusion of all the aforementioned parameters should be encouraged , not only for diagnostic and prognostic purposes but also for evaluating the effect of interventions .
Acute care surgery in heart transplant recipients .
Orthotopic heart transplantation ( OHT ) is the optimal treatment for end-stage heart failure .
We reviewed our institutional experience between 2008 and 2012 with acute care surgery ( ACS ) consultations and procedures within 1 year of OHT in recipients bridged to transplantation with medical therapy ( MT , n = 169 ) , including intravenous inotropes , and ventricular assist devices ( VADs , n = 74 ) .
In total , 28 consultations were required in 21 patients ( 9 % ) and 16 procedures were performed in 11 patients ( 5 % ) .
The interval from transplantation to consultation was shorter for the MT group ( 50 vs 82 days ; P = 0.015 ) , whereas the interval from consultation to operation was longer ( 5 vs 1 day ; P = 0.03 ) .
Patients undergoing MT were more likely to require consultation for abdominal problems ( 88 vs 27 % ; P = 0.004 ) .
All but one of the seven ischemic / inflammatory abdominal problems occurred in the MT group .
Complications occurred after five ACS procedures ( 31 % ) in two patients undergoing MT and three patients undergoing VAD .
Mortality was 24 per cent with five deaths occurring within 30 days of ACS consultation and / or operation .
In summary , this is one of the largest series of ACS problems in patients undergoing OHT bridged to transplant with MT or VAD .
With similar incidence in MT and VAD groups , ACS consultations and operations are infrequent with high mortality and morbidity .
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as bridge to recovery in infarction-related refractory right heart failure .
HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS : We present a 41-year-old man with cardiac arrest in need of cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) with the diagnosis of a posterior wall infarction , who was hospitalized in our cardiac centre .
INVESTIGATIONS : The cardiac catheterization showed a thrombotic obstruction of the right coronary artery .
After percutaneous coronary revascularization a hemodynamically stable situation could be achieved and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit ( ICU ) .
TREATMENT AND CLINICAL COURSE : The patient became again hemodynamically unstable and a CPR was required .
Based on the acute right heart failure with therapy refractory cardiogenic shock we decided within our heart team for an extra corporeal membrane oxygenation ( ECMO ) applied during CPR in the ICU .
The extracorporeal support was needed for three days .
Seven days after the emergency cardiac catheterization the patient was extubated and transferred to our intermediate care .
CONCLUSION : Extracorporeal life support is feasible und effective for bridging therapy in patients with acute ischemic right heart failure with refractory cardiogenic shock and successful reperfusion therapy .
Heart failure with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction .
Half of patients with heart failure ( HF ) have a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) .
Morbidity and mortality in HFpEF are similar to values observed in patients with HF and reduced EF , yet no effective treatment has been identified .
While early research focused on the importance of diastolic dysfunction in the pathophysiology of HFpEF , recent studies have revealed that multiple non-diastolic abnormalities in cardiovascular function also contribute .
Diagnosis of HFpEF is frequently challenging and relies upon careful clinical evaluation , echo-Doppler cardiography , and invasive haemodynamic assessment .
In this review , the principal mechanisms , diagnostic approaches , and clinical trials are reviewed , along with a discussion of novel treatment strategies that are currently under investigation or hold promise for the future .
Trends from 1996 to 2007 in incidence and mortality outcomes of heart failure after acute myocardial infarction : a population-based study of 20,812 patients with first acute myocardial infarction in Western Australia .
BACKGROUND : Advances in treatment for acute myocardial infarction ( AMI ) are likely to have had a beneficial impact on the incidence of and deaths attributable to heart failure ( HF ) complicating AMI , although limited data are available to support this contention .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Western Australian linked administrative health data were used to identify 20 812 consecutive patients , aged 40 to 84 years , without prior HF hospitalized with an index ( first ) AMI between 1996 and 2007 .
We assessed the temporal incidence of and adjusted odds ratio / hazard ratio for death associated with HF concurrent with AMI admission and within 1 year after discharge .
Concurrent HF comprised 75 % of incident HF cases .
Between the periods 1996-1998 and 2005-2007 , the prevalence of HF after AMI declined from 28.1 % to 16.5 % , with an adjusted odds ratio of 0.50 ( 95 % CI , 0.44 to 0.55 ) .
The crude 28-day case-fatality rate for patients with concurrent HF declined marginally from 20.5 % to 15.9 % ( P &lt; 0.05 ) compared with those without concurrent HF , in whom the case-fatality rate declined from 11.0 % to 4.8 % ( P &lt; 0.001 ) .
Concurrent HF was associated with a multivariate-adjusted odds ratio of 2.2 for 28-day mortality and a hazard ratio of 2.2 for 1-year mortality in 28-day survivors .
Occurrence of HF within 90 days of the index AMI was associated with an adjusted hazard ratio of 2.7 for 1-year mortality in 90-day survivors .
CONCLUSIONS : Despite encouraging declines in the incidence of HF complicating AMI , it remains a common problem with high mortality .
Increased attention to these high-risk patients is needed given the lack of improvement in their long-term prognosis .
Testosterone therapy during exercise rehabilitation in male patients with chronic heart failure who have low testosterone status : a double-blind randomized controlled feasibility study .
BACKGROUND : This study assessed the feasibility of a 12-week program of exercise , with and without intramuscular testosterone supplementation , in male patients with chronic heart failure ( CHF ) and low testosterone status and collected preliminary data for key health outcomes .
METHODS : Male patients with CHF ( n = 41 , age 67.2 years , range 51-84 years ) with mean ± SD testosterone levels of 10.7 ± 2.6 nmol / L ( 309 ± 76 ng / dL ) were randomly allocated to exercise with testosterone or placebo groups .
Feasibility was assessed in terms of recruitment , intervention compliance , and attrition .
Outcomes included an incremental shuttle walk test , peak oxygen uptake , muscular strength , echocardiographic measures , N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide , inflammatory markers , depression ( Beck Depression Inventory ) , and health-related quality of life ( Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire and Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form ) .
RESULTS : Attrition was 30 % but with 100 % compliance to exercise and injections in patients who completed the study .
Similar improvements in shuttle walk test ( 18 % vs 19 % ) , body mass ( -1.3 kg vs -1.0 kg ) , and hand grip strength ( 2.1 kg vs 2.5 kg ) from baseline were observed in both groups .
The exercise with testosterone group showed improvements from baseline in peak oxygen uptake ( P &lt; .01 ) , Beck Depression Inventory ( P &lt; .05 ) , leg strength ( P &lt; .05 ) , and several Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form quality of life domains ( P &lt; .05 ) , which were generally not apparent in the exercise with placebo group .
Echocardiographic measures , N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide , and inflammatory markers were mostly unchanged .
CONCLUSIONS : This study shows for the first time that testosterone supplementation during a program of exercise rehabilitation is feasible and can positively impact on a range of key health outcomes in elderly male patients with CHF who have a low testosterone status .
Functional electrical stimulation of peripheral muscles improves endothelial function and clinical and emotional status in heart failure patients with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction .
BACKGROUND : Functional electrical stimulation ( FES ) improves exercise capacity , quality of life , emotional stress , and endothelial function in chronic heart failure with impaired systolic function .
We sought to investigate the effects of FES on the above parameters in patients with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) .
METHODS : Thirty HFpEF patients , 18 female and 12 male , aged 69 ± 8 years , in New York Heart Association class II or III and with mean ejection fraction 63 % ± 6 % , were randomly ( 1 : 1 ) assigned to a 6-week FES program or placebo .
Assessment was performed at baseline and after completion of training protocol and included 6-minute walked distance , quality of life ( Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire and Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire ) , depressive symptoms ( Beck Depression Inventory and Zung self-rated depression scores ) , B-type natriuretic peptide , endothelial function ( flow-mediated dilatation ) , and left ventricular diastolic function .
RESULTS : A significant improvement in 6-minute walked distance ( F = 21.61 , P = .001 ) , Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire summary ( F = 8.68 , P = .006 ) , Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire ( F = 6.43 , P = .017 ) , Beck Depression Inventory ( F = 6.66 , P = .015 ) , Zung ( F = 6.25 , P = .019 ) , and flow-mediated dilatation diameter ( F = 11.98 , P = .002 ) was observed in the FES group compared with placebo group ; B-type natriuretic peptide also declined but not significantly ( F = 0.249 , P = .622 ) , and there was a tendency toward lower mitral E / e &apos; wave ratio ( F = 3.066 , P = .091 ) .
CONCLUSION : As in heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction , FES also improves exercise capacity , quality of life , emotional status , and endothelial function in HFpEF .
Given the lack of effective evidence-based therapies in these patients , FES warrants further investigation .
Chronic heart failure is associated with transforming growth factor beta-dependent yield and functional decline in atrial explant-derived c-Kit + cells .
BACKGROUND : Cardiac c-Kit + cells isolated from cardiac explant-derived cells modestly improve cardiac functions after myocardial infarction ; however , their full potential has not yet been realized .
For instance , the majority of potential candidates for cell therapy suffer from chronic heart failure ( CHF ) , and it is unclear how this disease affects the explant-derived progenitor cells .
Therefore , the objective of this study was to determine the effect of CHF on the number and phenotype of cardiac explant c-Kit + progenitors and elucidate mechanisms of their regulation .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Myocardial infarction was created by left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion .
Sham-operated animals were used as a control group .
CHF-developed infarcted animals were selected on the basis of left ventricle end-diastolic pressure ≥ 20 mm Hg and scar size ≥ 30 % .
Here , we found that CHF atrial explants produced less c-Kit + cells than sham explants .
CHF-derived c-Kit + cells exhibited upregulated transforming growth factor-β ( TGF-β ) signaling , increased level of epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers , and diminished expression of pluripotency markers compared with shams .
We show that intervention with TGF-β signaling by inhibiting TGF-β receptor type I or Smad 2 / 3 using small-molecule inhibitors improved c-Kit + cell yield , attenuated epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers , stimulated the pluripotency marker Nanog , and improved efficiency of c-Kit + cell differentiation toward cardiomyocyte-like cells in vitro .
CONCLUSIONS : Taken together , our findings suggest that TGF-β inhibition positively modulates c-Kit + cell phenotype and function in vitro , and this strategy may be considered in optimizing cardiac progenitor function and cell expansion protocols for clinical application .
Periodic breathing with no heart beat .
A protocol was originally designed to study breathing control during and following cardiac arrest in humans , taking advantage of the period of pulseless ventricular fibrillation ( PVF ) produced while testing a newly implanted cardioverter-defibrillator device .
A patient aged in his 60s with New York Heart Association class III heart failure ( HF ) ( left ventricular ejection fraction of 25 % ) who was originally part of this study displayed permanent periodic breathing ( PB ) and was then excluded from the final data analysis ; his response is presented in this report .
The 8- to 9-s PVF was incidentally produced during the ascending phase of a PB cycle , followed by another 12-s recovery period of low BP .
PVF and its recovery had no effect on PB characteristics ( period or amplitude ) .
This occurred despite a profound change in Paco2 , cerebral blood flow , and perfusion of the carotid bodies .
It is concluded that PB in patients with HF could be produced by primary oscillations originating from the central pattern generator .
Do anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs have a role in treating heart failure in the absence of atrial fibrillation ?
Patients with atrial fibrillation ( AF ) and heart failure ( HF ) are at risk for stroke , and progress in anticoagulation has led to new options for these patients .
Patients in sinus rhythm may benefit from antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants , but much work remains to establish efficacy and safety .
Additional progress is needed , including better tools for risk stratification and clarity regarding the need for antiplatelet agents in combination with anticoagulants for those with other vascular diseases .
Nutrition in heart failure : an update .
PURPOSE OF REVIEW : Chronic heart failure ( CHF ) is increasingly recognized as a multisystem disease with important comorbidities such as anemia , insulin resistance , autonomic dysbalance , or cardiac cachexia .
RECENT FINDINGS : Apart from these perturbations , increasing evidence points to alterations in intestinal morphology , permeability , and absorption function in patients with CHF .
This review provides an overview of the sonographic , histological , and functional abnormalities of different gastrointestinal regions .
This intestinal dysfunction and disturbed intestinal barrier may lead to both the chronic inflammatory state and catabolic / anabolic imbalance as seen in cardiac cachexia , as a terminal stage of CHF , which carries a particularly poor prognosis .
This review highlights the current knowledge of nutritional abnormalities that may occur in CHF , including fat , carbohydrates , proteins , water , and micronutrients .
The regulation of feeding is discussed , as are nutritional strategies with potentially anti-inflammatory effects in the treatment of CHF .
SUMMARY : The gut and its role for inflammation and dietary interventions in heart failure patients are a crucial target of further heart failure research .
B-type natriuretic peptide and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide – Diagnostic role in stable coronary artery disease B-type natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) and its N-terminal fragment ( NT-proBNP ) are released from ventricular cardiomyocytes in response to an increase in ventricular wall stress and to myocardial ischemia .
Both BNP and NT-proBNP have proven to be reliable diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in patients with heart failure .
Recently , the diagnostic roles of BNP and NT-proBNP in patients with coronary artery disease ( CAD ) have been investigated .
For patients with acute coronary syndromes , data have been derived from a great number of studies , whereas in patients with stable CAD , only a limited amount of recent data is available ; although limited , these data show that elevations in BNP and NT-proBNP levels are associated with the extent of CAD , thus providing prognostic information for an unfavourable clinical outcome .
However , clinical and therapeutic implications are indistinct and need to be elucidated in further studies .
Unilateral renal denervation improves autonomic balance in conscious rabbits with chronic heart failure .
A hallmark of chronic heart failure ( CHF ) is an increased sympathetic tone resulting in autonomic imbalance .
Renal denervation ( DNx ) in CHF patients has resulted in symptomatic improvement , but the protective mechanisms remain unclear .
We hypothesized in CHF , unilateral renal DNx would improve cardiac autonomic balance .
The present study used conscious , chronically instrumented New Zealand White rabbits undergoing renal DNx prior to pacing-induced CHF .
Four treatment groups were used : nonpace , non-DNx &#91; Sham-Innervated ( Sham-INV ) &#93; , nonpace DNx ( sham-DNx ) , pace non-DNx ( CHF-INV ) or pace DNx ( CHF-DNx ) .
We examined several markers indicative of autonomic balance .
Baroreflex sensitivity and time domain heart rate variability ( HRV ) were both decreased in the CHF-INV group compared with sham-INV and were restored to sham levels by renal DNx .
Power spectral analysis indicated an increase in low-frequency / high-frequency ( LF / HF ) ratio in the CHF-INV compared with the sham-INV , which was normalized to sham levels by DNx .
To assess whether this was due to a withdrawal of sympathetic tone or an increase in parasympathetic tone , the heart rate response was measured after an intravenous bolus of metoprolol or atropine .
Bradycardia induced by intravenous metoprolol ( indicative of cardiac sympathetic tone ) was exacerbated in CHF-INV rabbits compared with sham-INV but was normalized in CHF-DNx .
Conversely , the tachycardia in response to intravenous atropine ( indicative of cardiac vagal tone ) was not improved in CHF-DNx vs. CHF-INV animals .
Renal DNx also prevented the increase in circulating plasma NE seen in CHF-INV rabbits .
These results suggest renal DNx improves cardiac autonomic balance in CHF by a reduction of sympathetic tone .
Cardiac-resynchronization therapy in heart failure with a narrow QRS complex .
BACKGROUND : Cardiac-resynchronization therapy ( CRT ) reduces morbidity and mortality in chronic systolic heart failure with a wide QRS complex .
Mechanical dyssynchrony also occurs in patients with a narrow QRS complex , which suggests the potential usefulness of CRT in such patients .
METHODS : We conducted a randomized trial involving 115 centers to evaluate the effect of CRT in patients with New York Heart Association class III or IV heart failure , a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35 % or less , a QRS duration of less than 130 msec , and echocardiographic evidence of left ventricular dyssynchrony .
All patients underwent device implantation and were randomly assigned to have CRT capability turned on or off .
The primary efficacy outcome was the composite of death from any cause or first hospitalization for worsening heart failure .
RESULTS : On March 13 , 2013 , the study was stopped for futility on the recommendation of the data and safety monitoring board .
At study closure , the 809 patients who had undergone randomization had been followed for a mean of 19.4 months .
The primary outcome occurred in 116 of 404 patients in the CRT group , as compared with 102 of 405 in the control group ( 28.7 % vs. 25.2 % ; hazard ratio , 1.20 ; 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; , 0.92 to 1.57 ; P = 0.15 ) .
There were 45 deaths in the CRT group and 26 in the control group ( 11.1 % vs. 6.4 % ; hazard ratio , 1.81 ; 95 % CI , 1.11 to 2.93 ; P = 0.02 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In patients with systolic heart failure and a QRS duration of less than 130 msec , CRT does not reduce the rate of death or hospitalization for heart failure and may increase mortality .
Comparative effects of ventricular assist device and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation on renal function in pediatric heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Effects of mechanical cardiac support on renal function in children with end-stage heart failure are unknown .
The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of ventricular assist device ( VAD ) and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation ( ECMO ) on renal function in children .
METHODS : We performed a single center retrospective observational study in children with end-stage heart failure supported on pediatric mechanical cardiac support .
The patient population was divided into three groups : the VAD group included patients receiving ventricular assist device support ; the ECMO group included patients receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation membrane support for more than 14 days ; and the ECMO + VAD group included patients receiving ECMO followed by VAD support .
Comparison of baseline characteristics , duration of mechanical cardiac support , and renal function was made between the three groups .
RESULTS : During the study period , there were 23 patients in the VAD group , 16 patients in the ECMO + VAD group , and 37 patients in the ECMO group .
The patients in the ECMO group were significantly younger and smaller than the patients in the VAD and ECMO + VAD groups .
There was a steady improvement in eGFR in the VAD group and the ECMO + VAD group until day 7 after which there was a decline in renal function .
In the ECMO group , the improvement in eGFR continued until day 28 after which there was a steady decline in eGFR .
Improvement in eGFR in the VAD group and the ECMO + VAD group was much higher than in the ECMO group in the first 7 days .
CONCLUSIONS : On the basis of these data , we demonstrate that renal dysfunction improves early after mechanical cardiac support .
beta1-adrenergic receptor and sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 ( S1PR1 ) reciprocal downregulation influences cardiac hypertrophic response and progression to heart failure : protective role of S1PR1 cardiac gene therapy .
BACKGROUND : The sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 ( S1PR1 ) and β1-adrenergic receptor ( β1AR ) are G-protein-coupled receptors expressed in the heart .
These 2 receptors have opposing actions on adenylyl cyclase because of differential G-protein coupling .
Importantly , both of these receptors can be regulated by the actions of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 , which triggers desensitization and downregulation processes .
Although classic signaling paradigms suggest that simultaneous activation of β1ARs and S1PR1s in a myocyte would simply result in opposing action on cAMP production , in this report we have uncovered a direct interaction between these 2 receptors , with regulatory involvement of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 .
METHODS AND RESULTS : In HEK ( human embryonic kidney ) 293 cells overexpressing both β1AR and S1PR1 , we demonstrated that β1AR downregulation can occur after stimulation with sphingosine-1-phosphate ( an S1PR1 agonist ) , whereas S1PR1 downregulation can be triggered by isoproterenol ( a β-adrenergic receptor agonist ) treatment .
This cross talk between these 2 distinct G-protein-coupled receptors appears to have physiological significance , because they interact and show reciprocal regulation in mouse hearts undergoing chronic β-adrenergic receptor stimulation and in a rat model of postischemic heart failure .
CONCLUSIONS : We demonstrate that restoration of cardiac plasma membrane levels of S1PR1 produces beneficial effects that counterbalance the deleterious β1AR overstimulation in heart failure .
Impact of physician continuity on death or urgent readmission after discharge among patients with heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Early physician follow-up after discharge is associated with lower rates of death and readmission among patients with heart failure .
We explored whether physician continuity further influences outcomes after discharge .
METHODS : We used data from linked administrative databases for all adults aged 20 years or more in the province of Alberta who were discharged alive from hospital between January 1999 and June 2009 with a first-time diagnosis of heart failure .
We used Cox proportional hazard models with time-dependent covariates to analyze the effect of follow-up with a familiar physician within the first month after discharge on the primary outcome of death or urgent all-cause readmission over 6 months .
A familiar physician was defined as one who had seen the patient at least twice in the year before the index admission or once during the index admission .
RESULTS : In the first month after discharge , 5336 ( 21.9 % ) of the 24 373 identified patients had no follow-up visits , 16 855 ( 69.2 % ) saw a familiar physician , and 2182 ( 9.0 % ) saw unfamiliar physician ( s ) exclusively .
The risk of death or unplanned readmission during the 6-month observation period was lower among patients who saw a familiar physician ( 43.6 % ; adjusted hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; 0.87 , 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; 0.83-0.91 ) or an unfamiliar physician ( 43.6 % ; adjusted HR 0.90 , 95 % CI 0.83-0.97 ) for early follow-up visits , as compared with patients who had no follow-up visits ( 62.9 % ) .
Taking into account all follow-up visits over the 6-month period , we found that the risk of death or urgent readmission was lower among patients who had all of their visits with a familiar physician than among those followed by unfamiliar physicians ( adjusted HR 0.91 , 95 % CI 0.85-0.98 ) .
INTERPRETATION : Early physician follow-up after discharge and physician continuity were both associated with better outcomes among patients with heart failure .
Research is needed to explore whether physician continuity is important for other conditions and in settings other than recent hospital discharge .
Human heart failure is accompanied by altered protein kinase A subunit expression and post-translational state .
β-Adrenergic receptor blockade reduces total mortality and all-cause hospitalizations in patients with heart failure ( HF ) .
Nonetheless , β-blockade does not halt disease progression , suggesting that cAMP-dependent protein kinase ( PKA ) signaling downstream of β-adrenergic receptor activation may persist through unique post-translational states .
In this study , human myocardial tissue was used to examine the state of PKA subunits .
As expected , total myosin binding protein-C phosphorylation and Ser23 / 24 troponin I phosphorylation significantly decreased in HF .
Examination of PKA subunits demonstrated no change in type II regulatory ( RIIα ) or catalytic ( Cα ) subunit expression , although site specific RIIα ( Ser96 ) and Cα ( Thr197 ) phosphorylation were increased in HF .
Further , the expression of type I regulatory subunit ( RI ) was increased in HF .
Isoelectric focusing of RIα demonstrated up to three variants , consistent with reports that Ser77 and Ser83 are in vivo phosphorylation sites .
Western blots with site-specific monoclonal antibodies showed increased Ser83 phosphorylation in HF .
8-fluo-cAMP binding by wild type and phosphomimic Ser77 and Ser83 mutant RIα proteins demonstrated reduced Kd for the double mutant as compared to WT RIα .
Therefore , failing myocardium displays altered expression and post-translational modification of PKA subunits that may impact downstream signaling .
Autonomic modulation of repolarization instability in patients with heart failure prone to ventricular tachycardia .
QT variability ( QTV ) signifies repolarization lability , and increased QTV is a risk predictor for sudden cardiac death .
The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of autonomic nervous system activity on QTV .
This study was performed in 29 subjects : 10 heart failure ( HF ) patients with spontaneous ventricular tachycardia &#91; HFVT ( + ) &#93; , 10 HF patients without spontaneous VT &#91; HFVT ( - ) &#93; , and 9 subjects with structurally normal hearts ( HNorm ) .
The beat-to-beat QT interval was measured on 3-min records of surface ECGs at baseline and during interventions ( atrial pacing and esmolol , isoprenaline , and atropine infusion ) .
Variability in QT intervals was expressed as the SD of all QT intervals ( SDQT ) .
The ratio of the SDQT to SD of RR intervals ( SDRR ) was calculated as an index of QTV normalized to heart rate variability .
There was a trend toward a higher baseline SDQT-to-SDRR ratio in the HFVT ( + ) group compared with the HFVT ( - ) and HNorm groups ( P = 0.09 ) .
SDQT increased significantly in the HFVT ( + ) and HFVT ( - ) groups compared with the HNorm group during fixed-rate atrial pacing ( P = 0.008 ) .
Compared with baseline , isoprenaline infusion increased SDQT in HNorm subjects ( P = 0.02 ) but not in HF patients .
SDQT remained elevated in the HFVT ( + ) group relative to the HNorm group despite acute β-adrenoceptor blockade with esmolol ( P = 0.02 ) .
In conclusion , patients with HF and spontaneous VT have larger fluctuations in beat-to-beat QT intervals .
This appears to be a genuine effect that is not solely a consequence of heart rate variation .
The effect of acute autonomic nervous system modulation on QTV appears to be limited in HF patients .
Genetic susceptibility to anthracycline-related congestive heart failure in survivors of haematopoietic cell transplantation .
Haematopoietic cell transplantation ( HCT ) survivors are at increased risk for developing congestive heart failure ( CHF ) , primarily due to pre-HCT exposure to anthracyclines .
We examined the association between the development of CHF after HCT and polymorphisms in 16 candidate genes involved in anthracycline metabolism , iron homeostasis , anti-oxidant defence , and myocardial remodelling .
A nested case-control study design was used .
Cases ( post-HCT CHF ) were identified from 2950 patients who underwent HCT between 1988 and 2007 at City of Hope and had survived ≥ 1 year .
This cohort formed the sampling frame for selecting controls ( without CHF ) matched on : age , race / ethnicity , cumulative anthracycline exposure , stem cell source ( allogeneic , autologous ) , and length of follow-up .
Seventy-seven cases with pre-HCT germline DNA and 178 controls were genotyped .
Multivariate analysis revealed that the odds of CHF was higher in females &#91; Odds Ratio ( OR ) = 2 · 9 , P &lt; 0 · 01 &#93; , individuals with pre-HCT chest radiation ( OR = 4 · 7 , P = 0 · 05 ) , hypertension ( OR = 2 · 9 , P = 0 · 01 ) , and with variants of genes coding for the NAD ( P ) H-oxidase subunit RAC2 ( rs13058338 , 7508T → A ; OR = 2 · 8 , P &lt; 0 · 01 ) , HFE ( rs1799945 , 63C → G ; OR = 2 · 5 , P = 0 · 05 ) or the doxorubicin efflux transporter ABCC2 ( rs8187710 , 1515G → A ; OR = 4 · 3 , P &lt; 0 · 01 ) .
A combined ( clinical and genetic ) CHF predictive model performed better &#91; area under the curve ( AUC ) , 0 · 79 &#93; than the genetic ( AUC = 0 · 67 ) or the clinical ( AUC = 0 · 69 ) models alone .
Fat , cachexia , and the right ventricle in heart failure : a web of complicity .
In this guideline , the International Right Heart Foundation Working Group moves a step forward to develop a common language to describe the development and defects that exemplify the common syndrome of right heart failure .
We first propose fundamental definitions of the distinctive components of the right heart circulation and provide consensus on a universal definition of right heart failure .
These definitions will form the foundation for describing a uniform nomenclature for right heart circulatory failure with a view to foster collaborative research initiatives and conjoint education in an effort to provide insight into mechanisms of disease unique to the right heart .
First-in-class angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor in heart failure .
Neprilysin inhibitors augment the natriuretic peptide system by preventing the breakdown of atrial natriuretic peptide and B-type natriuretic peptide .
LCZ696 , an angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor composed of a neprilysin inhibitor prodrug and the angiotensin receptor antagonist valsartan , has proven effective in hypertension , has shown promise in a pilot trial of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction , and is being tested in a large outcomes trial of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction .
A preserved ejection fraction outcomes trial is beginning .
Pharmacological treatment of acute heart failure : current treatment and new targets .
Acute heart failure ( AHF ) is defined as the rapid onset of , or changes in , the symptoms and signs of heart failure ( HF ) .
It is a life-threatening situation in which diagnosis and initiation of therapy are crucial .
The treatment aims are to stabilize the patient , improve clinical symptoms , and increase long-term survival rates .
Few treatments have been investigated in clinical trials .
This review summarizes the principles of pharmacologic treatment , the underlying clinical trials , and new pharmacologic targets .
Therapeutic implications of biomarkers in chronic heart failure .
Understanding of chronic heart failure ( HF ) has progressed from the concept of a purely hemodynamic disorder to that of a syndrome that results from dysfunction in interconnected molecular pathways .
As a result , the focus of research investigations and clinical care has shifted to measurement and modification of maladaptive molecular processes .
Accumulating evidence shows that molecular biomarkers provide a window into the pathophysiology of chronic HF and therefore have important therapeutic implications .
However , the use of biomarkers in the treatment of HF remains in its infancy .
This is partly a result of shortcomings in research studies and a dearth of biomarker-guided clinical trials .
In this review , we summarize the potential therapeutic implications of promising biomarkers that uniquely capture the molecular dysfunction that occurs in chronic HF .
We discuss the need for strict statistical standards in biomarker studies , provide an overview of biomarker-guided clinical trial design , and discuss the therapeutic potential of a multimarker-based strategy .
MicroRNAs in heart failure : new targets in disease management .
Heart failure is the leading cause of mortality in Western society and represents the fastest growing subclass of cardiovascular diseases .
An increasing body of evidence indicates an important role for microRNAs ( miRNAs ) in the pathogenesis and progression of heart failure .
miRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that regulate expression of target genes by sequence-specific binding to the 3 &apos; untranslated region of messenger RNA , which results in degradation or translational repression .
To date , many miRNAs ( and their targets ) that play a role in diverse aspects of cardiac remodeling and heart failure development have been identified .
Here , we give an overview of these miRNAs and their role in cardiac pathogenesis .
In addition , we provide brief insight into the potential of miRNAs as novel therapeutic targets for heart failure .
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors in heart failure .
Heart failure ( HF ) is a very common condition that , despite advances in treatment , carries significant morbidity and mortality .
Although there is good evidence for the treatment of HF with reduced ejection fraction ( HFrEF ) , the treatment for HF with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) is not well defined .
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system ( RAAS ) has been shown to be an effective target in the treatment of HFrEF using angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors , angiotensin receptor blockers , and aldosterone blockade , although the evidence in HFpEF is less clear .
This review aims to look first at the evidence for these drugs , and second at the newer drugs that act on the RAAS , namely , direct renin inhibitors , neutral endopeptidase inhibitors , vasopeptidase inhibitors , and angiotensin receptor blockers .
Skeletal muscle abnormalities and exercise capacity in adults with a Fontan circulation .
OBJECTIVES : The peripheral muscle pump is key in promoting cardiac filling during exercise , especially in subjects who lack a subpulmonary ventricle ( the Fontan circulation ) .
A muscle-wasting syndrome exists in acquired heart failure but has not been assessed in Fontan subjects .
We sought to investigate whether adults with the Fontan circulation exhibit reduced skeletal muscle mass and / or metabolic abnormalities .
DESIGN AND PATIENTS : Sixteen New York Heart Association Class I / II Fontan adults ( 30 ± 2 years ) underwent cardiopulmonary exercise testing and lean mass quantification with dual x-ray absorptiometry ( DXA ) ; eight had calf muscle ( 31 ) P magnetic resonance spectroscopy as did eight healthy age-matched and sex-matched controls .
DXA results were compared with Australian reference data .
SETTING : Single tertiary referral centre .
RESULTS : Peak VO2 was 1.9 ± 0.1 L / min ( 66 ± 3 % of predicted values ) .
Skeletal muscle mass assessed by relative appendicular lean mass index was significantly reduced compared with age-matched and sex-matched reference values ( Z-score -1.46 ± 0.22 , p &lt; 0.0001 ) .
Low skeletal muscle mass correlated with poorer VO2 max ( r = 0.67 , p = 0.004 ) .
Overall , skeletal muscle mass T-score ( derived from comparison with young normal reference mean ) was -1.47 ± 0.21 ; 4 / 16 Fontan subjects had sarcopenic range muscle wasting ( T-score &lt; -2.0 ) and 9 / 16 had less marked , but clinically significant wasting ( T-score &lt; -1.0 but ≥ -2.0 ) .
Muscle aerobic capacity , measured by the rate constant ( k ) of postexercise phosphocreatine resynthesis , was significantly impaired in Fontan adults versus controls ( 1.48 ± 0.13 vs 2.40 ± 0.33 min ( -1 ) , p = 0.02 ) .
Psychometric testing of the Self-Care of Heart Failure Index Version 6.2 .
The Self-Care of Heart Failure Index Version 6.2 ( SCHFI v.6.2 ) is widely used , but its psychometric profile is still questioned .
In a sample of 659 heart failure patients from Italy , we performed confirmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) to test the original construct of the SCHFI v.6.2 scales ( Self-Care Maintenance , Self-Care Management , and Self-Care Confidence ) , with limited success .
We then used exploratory factor analysis to determine the presence of separate scale dimensions , followed by CFA in a separate sub-sample .
Construct validity of individual scales showed excellent fit indices : CFI = .92 , RMSEA = .05 for the Self-Care Maintenance Scale ; CFI = .95 , RMSEA = .07 for the Self-Care Management Scale ; CFI = .99 , RMSEA = .02 for the Self-Care Confidence scale .
Contrasting groups validity , internal consistency , and test-retest reliability were supported as well .
This evidence provides a new understanding of the structure of the SCHFI v.6.2 and supports its use in clinical practice and research .
Circulating fragments of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptides in plasma of heart failure patients .
BACKGROUND : The use of nonstandardized N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide ( NT-proBNP ) assays can contribute to the misdiagnosis of heart failure ( HF ) .
Moreover , there is yet to be established a common consensus regarding the circulating forms of NT-proBNP being used in current assays .
We aimed to characterize and quantify the various forms of NT-proBNP in the circulation of HF patients .
METHODS : Plasma samples were collected from HF patients ( n = 20 ) at rest and stored at -80 ° C.
NT-proBNP was enriched from HF patient plasma by use of immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometric analysis .
Customized homogeneous sandwich AlphaLISA ® immunoassays were developed and validated to quantify 6 fragments of NT-proBNP .
RESULTS : Mass spectrometry identified the presence of several N- and C-terminally processed forms of circulating NT-proBNP , with physiological proteolysis between Pro2-Leu3 , Leu3-Gly4 , Pro6-Gly7 , and Pro75-Arg76 .
Consistent with this result , AlphaLISA immunoassays demonstrated that antibodies targeting the extreme N or C termini measured a low apparent concentration of circulating NT-proBNP .
The apparent circulating NT-proBNP concentration was increased with antibodies targeting nonglycosylated and nonterminal epitopes ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In plasma collected from HF patients , immunoreactive NT-proBNP was present as multiple N- and C-terminally truncated fragments of the full length NT-proBNP molecule .
Immunodetection of NT-proBNP was significantly improved with the use of antibodies that did not target these terminal regions .
These findings support the development of a next generation NT-proBNP assay targeting nonterminal epitopes as well as avoiding the central glycosylated region of this molecule .
Prevalence , clinical characteristics , and outcomes associated with eccentric versus concentric left ventricular hypertrophy in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
Although concentric remodeling ( CR ) and concentric hypertrophy ( CH ) are common forms of left ventricular ( LV ) remodeling in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) , eccentric hypertrophy ( EH ) can also occur in these patients .
However , clinical characteristics and outcomes of EH have not been well described in HFpEF .
We prospectively studied 402 patients with HFpEF , divided into 4 groups based on LV structure : normal geometry ( no LV hypertrophy &#91; LVH &#93; and relative wall thickness &#91; RWT &#93; ≤ 0.42 ) ; CR ( no LVH and RWT &gt; 0.42 ) ; CH ( LVH and RWT &gt; 0.42 ) ; and EH ( LVH and RWT ≤ 0.42 ) .
We compared clinical , laboratory , echocardiographic , invasive hemodynamic , and outcome data among groups .
Of 402 patients , 48 ( 12 % ) had EH .
Compared with CH , patients with EH had lower systolic blood pressure and less renal impairment despite similar rates of hypertension .
After adjustment for covariates , EH was associated with reduced LV contractility compared with CH : lower LVEF ( β coefficient = -3.2 ; 95 % confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; -5.4 to -1.1 % ) and ratio of systolic blood pressure to end-systolic volume ( β coefficient = -1.0 ; 95 % CI -1.5 to -0.5 mm Hg / ml ) .
EH was also associated with increased LV compliance compared with CH ( LV end-diastolic volume at an idealized LV end-diastolic pressure of 20 mm Hg β coefficient = 14.2 ; 95 % CI 9.4 to 19.1 ml ) .
Despite these differences , EH and CH had similarly elevated cardiac filling pressures and equivalent adverse outcomes .
In conclusion , the presence of EH denotes a distinct subset of HFpEF that is pathophysiologically similar to HF with reduced EF ( HFrEF ) and may benefit from HFrEF therapy .
Impact of carvedilol and metoprolol on inappropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy : the MADIT-CRT trial ( Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation With Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy ) .
OBJECTIVES : The goal of this study was to evaluate the effects of carvedilol and metoprolol on the endpoint of inappropriate implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in the MADIT-CRT ( Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation With Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy ) study .
BACKGROUND : The impact of carvedilol and metoprolol on inappropriate therapy in heart failure patients with devices has not yet been investigated .
METHODS : All patients in the MADIT-CRT study who received a device ( N = 1,790 ) were identified .
Using time-dependent Cox regression analysis , we compared patients treated with different types of beta-blockers or no beta-blockers on the primary endpoint of inappropriate therapy , delivered as antitachycardia pacing ( ATP ) or shock therapy .
Secondary endpoints were inappropriate therapy due to atrial fibrillation and atrial tachyarrhythmias , also evaluated as ATP or shock therapy .
RESULTS : Inappropriate therapy occurred in 253 ( 14 % ) of 1,790 patients during a follow-up period of 3.4 ± 1.1 years .
Treatment with carvedilol was associated with a significantly decreased risk of inappropriate therapy compared with metoprolol ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; : 0.64 &#91; 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) : 0.48 to 0.85 &#93; ; p = 0.002 ) .
The reduction in risk was consistent for inappropriate ATP ( HR : 0.66 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.48 to 0.90 &#93; ; p = 0.009 ) and inappropriate shock therapy ( HR : 0.54 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.36 to 0.80 &#93; ; p = 0.002 ) .
The risk of inappropriate therapy caused by atrial fibrillation was also reduced in patients receiving carvedilol compared with metoprolol ( HR : 0.50 &#91; 95 % CI : 0.32 to 0.81 &#93; ; p = 0.004 ) .
General use of beta-blockers ( 93 % ) and adherence in this study was high .
CONCLUSIONS : In heart failure patients undergoing either cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator or with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator device , carvedilol was associated with a 36 % lower rate of inappropriate ATP and shock therapy compared with metoprolol .
Inappropriate therapy due to atrial fibrillation was associated with a 50 % lower rate in patients receiving carvedilol compared with those receiving metoprolol .
( MADIT-CRT : Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation With Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy ; NCT00180271 ) .
Heart failure in patients treated with bisphosphonates .
OBJECTIVES : The aim of this study was to investigate the occurrence of heart failure in patients treated with bisphosphonates .
DESIGN : In this nationwide retrospective cohort study from Denmark , all users of bisphosphonates and raloxifene between 1996 and 2006 ( n = 102 342 ) were included in the &apos; exposed &apos; group and three age- and gender-matched subjects ( n = 307.026 ) from the general population comprised the control group .
The risk of heart failure was estimated by Cox proportional hazard analyses .
RESULTS : The mean follow-up times were 2.8 , 5.5 and 4.9 years for alendronate- , etidronate- and raloxifene-treated patients , respectively .
The absolute risk of heart failure was 4.4 % in the exposed group and 3.7 % in the control group ( P &lt; 0.01 ) .
The relative risk ( RR ) of heart failure was significantly increased in users of bisphophonates : crude RR 1.71 &#91; 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) 1.63-1.79 &#93; ; adjusted hazard ratio ( HR ) 1.41 ( 95 % CI 1.34-1.48 ) .
By comparison , raloxifene , which is used for the same indication but has a different mechanism of action , was not associated with an increased risk of heart failure : adjusted HR 1.07 ( 95 % CI 0.76-1.50 ) .
When the two most commonly used bisphosphonates , alendronate and etidronate , were analysed separately , significant trends in the risk of heart failure were observed across refill compliance strata .
The risk of heart failure increased significantly with increasing refill compliance for etidronate ( P for trend &lt; 0.01 ) , whereas it decreased for alendronate ( P for trend &lt; 0.01 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Bisphosphonate users were at increased risk of heart failure compared to age- and gender-matched control subjects .
However , users of alendronate showed a dose-dependent reduction in this risk , suggesting that alendronate may reduce the risk of heart failure .
Psoriasis is not associated with atherosclerosis and incident cardiovascular events : the Rotterdam Study .
Psoriasis has been suggested to be an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease ( CVD ) ; however , available studies have shown inconsistent results .
In this study , embedded within the population-based Rotterdam Study , we aimed to assess the association between psoriasis and cardiovascular outcomes .
Adjusted means were calculated for subclinical atherosclerosis using general linear models .
Using Cox regression , the hazards of cardiovascular events for psoriasis , as a time-dependent variable , were calculated .
A total of 262 psoriasis ( 24 % systemic / UV treatment ) and 8,009 reference subjects were followed up for a mean of 11 years .
Psoriasis patients were significantly younger , smoked more , and had higher diastolic blood pressure and body mass index levels .
The adjusted carotid intima-media thickness was 1.02 ± 0.18 mm for psoriasis and 1.02 ± 0.16 mm for reference subjects .
Similarly , crude and adjusted ankle-brachial index , pulse-wave velocity , and coronary artery calcium scores did not differ between the two groups .
The risk of incident CVD was not increased in psoriasis ( adjusted hazard ratio 0.73 , 95 % confidence interval 0.50-1.06 ) .
The results were similar when coronary heart disease , stroke , and heart failure were analyzed separately .
Psoriasis patients with predominantly mild disease from the general population are as likely to develop atherosclerosis and cardiovascular events as subjects without psoriasis .
Presence of diastolic dysfunction in patients with peripheral artery disease .
Peripheral artery disease ( PAD ) and heart failure ( HF ) share many risk factors ; however , the prevalence and characteristics of HF in patients with PAD have not been fully examined .
We investigated 120 consecutive patients with PAD , defined by an ankle-brachial index ≤ 0.9 .
In all , 36 ( 30 % ) patients had brain natriuretic peptide ( BNP ) levels ≥ 100 pg / mL ( high BNP group ) , and 84 ( 70 % ) patients had BNP levels &lt; 100 pg / mL ( low BNP group ) .
Univariate analysis showed that high BNP was associated with age , estimated glomerular filtration rate , hypertension , and transmitral E-wave / early diastolic mitral annular velocity ( E / e &apos; ) ratio .
Multivariate logistic regression analysis established that a high BNP was strongly and independently associated with the highest quartile of E / e &apos; , highlighting these patients &apos; diastolic dysfunction .
The prevalence of high BNP levels in patients with PAD suggests that routine BNP measurements might be useful to detect HF .
Hospital-to-Home : a hospital readmission reduction program for congestive heart failure .
OBJECTIVE : To decrease the 30-day readmission rate following hospital stay for congestive heart failure , which in the United States approaches 30 percent nationally .
In addition to indicating possible suboptimal care of patients with this condition , there are significant economic considerations .
DESIGN : Prospective , non-randomized , two-center pilot project .
SETTING : General hospital and cardiac specialty hospital , both located in a community of 150,000 population in predominantly rural South Dakota .
PARTICIPANTS : All patients admitted between June 7 , 2010 and June 6 , 2011 with a diagnosis of congestive heart failure .
INTERVENTION : An intensive transitions of care program was implemented to ensure adequate self-management training of patients and appropriate out-patient follow-up and monitoring of the patient by the health care system .
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE : 30-day all-cause readmissions .
RESULTS : A statistically significant 42 percent relative reduction in 30-day readmission rate was documented for those patients participating in the pilot program .
This represented a net economic savings , even accounting for the added cost of the intervention .
CONCLUSIONS : An intensive transitions of care program decreases the 30-day readmission rate for patients with congestive heart failure in a non-urbanized Midwestern state like South Dakota .
Heart rate variability in risk stratification of cardiac patients .
Heart rate ( HR ) variability has been extensively studied in cardiac patients , especially in patients surviving an acute myocardial infarction ( AMI ) and also in patients with congestive heart failure ( CHF ) or left ventricular ( LV ) dysfunction .
The majority of studies have shown that patients with reduced or abnormal HR variability have an increased risk of mortality within a few years after an AMI or after a diagnosis of CHF / LV dysfunction .
Various measures of HR dynamics , such as time-domain , spectral , and non-linear measures of HR variability have been used in risk stratification .
The prognostic power of various measures , except of those reflecting rapid R-R interval oscillations , has been almost identical , albeit some non-linear HR variability measures , such as short-term fractal scaling exponent have provided somewhat better prognostic information than the others .
Abnormal HR variability predicts both sudden and non-sudden cardiac death .
Because of remodeling of the arrhythmia substrate after AMI , early measurement of HR variability to identify those at high risk should likely be repeated later in order to assess the risk of fatal arrhythmia events .
Future randomized trials using HR variability / turbulence as one of the pre-defined inclusion criteria will show whether routine measurement of HR variability / turbulence will become a routine clinical tool for risk stratification of cardiac patients .
Renal artery stenosis - an update .
Renal artery stenosis ( RAS ) is a common form of peripheral arterial disease .
The most common cause of RAS is atherosclerosis .
It is predominantly unilateral .
The pathophysiologic mechanism stems from renal underperfusion resulting in the activation of the renin- angiotensin-aldosterone pathway .
Even though the majority of patients with RAS are asymptomatic , it can clinically present with hypertension , nephropathy and congestive heart failure .
This progressive disease can lead to resistant hypertension and end stage kidney failure .
Screening patients for RAS with either Doppler ultrasonography , computed tomographic angiography , or magnetic resonance angiography is preferred .
Adequate blood pressure control , goal-directed lipid-lowering therapy , smoking cessation , and other preventive measures form the foundation of management of patients with RAS .
Catheter-based percutaneous revascularization with angioplasty and stenting showed modest clinical benefit for patients in small retrospective studies , but data from randomized clinical trials failed to confirm these beneficial results .
The current ongoing Cardiovascular Outcomes in Renal Atherosclerotic Lesions ( CORAL ) trial may provide more concrete data regarding the role of stenting in RAS .
Surgical revascularization is considered only if catheter-based revascularization is unsuitable or unsuccessful .
The American College of Cardiology / American Heart Association guidelines on evaluation and management of patients with RAS provide the framework for determining individualized assessment and treatment plans for patients with RAS .
Bioinformatic analysis of microarray data reveals several key genes related to heart failure .
OBJECTIVES : Heart failure is a major public health problem worldwide .
However , the molecular mechanism is still unclear .
This study aims to discover differentially expressed genes ( DEGs ) between non-ischemic or ischemic heart failure samples and healthy control , which may be used for diagnosis and treatment of heart failure .
MATERIALS AND METHODS : Gene expression profile GSE9128 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus , including 3 normal samples , 4 non-ischemic heart failure samples and 4 ischemic samples .
Data processing and differential analysis were carried out with packages of R. Cluster analysis was also performed for all the samples to globally observe the difference among the three groups of samples .
Interactors of the DEGs were retrieved with Osprey and then networks were constructed .
The overlapping part of the network was selected out using Cytoscape , for which functional enrichment analysis was applied with DAVID tools .
RESULTS : A total of 293 and 133 DEGs were obtained for non-ischemic and ischemic heart failure , respectively .
Two networks were established and then functional enrichment analysis revealed that &quot; regulation of programmed cell death &quot; was most significantly over-represented in common DEGs .
CONCLUSIONS : Genes differentially expressed in non-ischemic and ischemic heart failure can be biomarkers to distinguish the two types of heart failure .
Besides , these genes can be targets to develop treatments .
Effects of care management and telehealth : a longitudinal analysis using medicare data .
OBJECTIVES : To evaluate mortality and healthcare utilization effects of an intervention that combined care management and telehealth , targeting individuals with congestive heart failure , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , or diabetes mellitus .
DESIGN : Retrospective matched cohort study .
SETTING : Northwest United States .
PARTICIPANTS : High-cost Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries ( N = 1,767 ) enrolled in two Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services demonstration participating clinics and a propensity-score matched control group .
INTERVENTION : The Health Buddy Program , which integrates a content-driven telehealth system with care management .
MEASUREMENTS : Mortality , inpatient admissions , hospital days , and emergency department ( ED ) visits during the 2-year study period were measured .
Cox-proportional hazard models and negative binomial regression models were used to assess the relationship between the intervention and survival and utilization , controlling for demographic and health characteristics that were statistically different between groups after matching .
RESULTS : At 2 years , participants offered the Health Buddy Program had 15 % lower risk-adjusted all-cause mortality ( hazard ratio ( HR ) = 0.85 , 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) = 0.74-0.98 ; P = .03 ) and had reductions in the number of quarterly inpatient admissions from baseline to the study period that were 18 % greater than those of matched controls during this same time period ( -0.035 vs -0.003 ; difference-in-differences = -0.032 , 95 % CI = -0.054 to -0.010 , P = .005 ) .
No relationship was found between the Health Buddy Program and ED use or number of hospital days for participants who were hospitalized .
The Health Buddy Program was most strongly associated with fewer admissions for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and mortality for those with congestive heart failure .
CONCLUSION : Care management coupled with content-driven telehealth technology has potential to improve health outcomes in high-cost Medicare beneficiaries .
Race , exercise training , and outcomes in chronic heart failure : findings from Heart Failure - a Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes in Exercise TraiNing ( HF-ACTION ) .
BACKGROUND : The strength of race as an independent predictor of long-term outcomes in a contemporary chronic heart failure ( HF ) population and its association with exercise training response have not been well established .
We aimed to investigate the association between race and outcomes and to explore interactions with exercise training in patients with ambulatory HF .
METHODS : We performed an analysis of HF-ACTION , which randomized 2331 patients with HF having an ejection fraction ≤ 35 % to usual care with or without exercise training .
We examined characteristics and outcomes ( mortality / hospitalization , mortality , and cardiovascular mortality / HF hospitalization ) by race using adjusted Cox models and explored an interaction with exercise training .
RESULTS : There were 749 self-identified black patients ( 33 % ) .
Blacks were younger with significantly more hypertension and diabetes , less ischemic etiology , and lower socioeconomic status versus whites .
Blacks had shorter 6-minute walk distance and lower peak VO2 at baseline .
Over a median follow-up of 2.5 years , black race was associated with increased risk for all outcomes except mortality .
After multivariable adjustment , black race was associated with increased mortality / hospitalization ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; 1.16 , 95 % CI 1.01-1.33 ) and cardiovascular mortality / HF hospitalization ( HR 1.46 , 95 % CI 1.20-1.77 ) .
The hazard associated with black race was largely caused by increased HF hospitalization ( HR 1.58 , 95 % CI 1.27-1.96 ) , given similar cardiovascular mortality .
There was no interaction between race and exercise training on outcomes ( P &gt; .5 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Black race in patients with chronic HF was associated with increased prevalence of modifiable risk factors , lower exercise performance , and increased HF hospitalization , but not increased mortality or a differential response to exercise training .
Improving outcomes in patients with atrial fibrillation : rationale and design of the Early treatment of Atrial fibrillation for Stroke prevention Trial .
BACKGROUND : Even on optimal therapy including anticoagulation and rate control , major cardiovascular complications ( stroke , cardiovascular death , and acute heart failure ) are common in patients with atrial fibrillation ( AF ) .
Conceptually , maintenance of sinus rhythm could prevent adverse outcomes related to AF .
Rhythm control therapy has been only moderately effective in published trials , and its potential benefit was offset by side effects of repeated interventions .
RATIONALE : Rhythm control therapy applied early after the first diagnosis of AF could preserve atrial structure and function and maintain sinus rhythm more effectively than the current practice of delayed rhythm control ( when symptoms persist after otherwise effective rate control ) .
Furthermore , catheter ablation and new antiarrhythmic drugs have enhanced the potential effectiveness and safety of rhythm control therapy .
The EAST will test whether an early , modern rhythm control therapy can reduce cardiovascular complications in AF .
DESIGN : The EAST ( Early treatment of Atrial fibrillation for Stroke prevention Trial ) will randomize approximately 3,000 patients with recent onset AF at risk for stroke ( CHA ₂ DS ₂ VASc score ≥ 2 ) to either guideline-mandated usual care or to usual care plus early rhythm control therapy in a prospective , randomized , open , blinded outcome assessment trial .
All patients will be followed up until the end of the trial for the composite primary outcome of cardiovascular death , stroke , worsening of heart failure , and myocardial infarction .
Nights spent in hospital will be counted as a coprimary outcome .
Usual care will consist of anticoagulation , therapy of underlying heart disease , and rate control as an initial approach .
Early rhythm control therapy will consist of usual care plus rhythm control therapy by antiarrhythmic drugs , catheter ablation , and a patient-operated electrocardiographic device to monitor the ongoing rhythm .
Key secondary outcomes include cognitive function and quality of life .
CONCLUSION : EAST will determine whether rhythm control therapy , when applied early after the initial diagnosis of AF , can prevent cardiovascular complications associated with AF .
Gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with ventricular assist devices : what every cardiac nurse should know .
Patients with end-stage heart failure are increasingly being treated with implantation of a long-term ventricular assist device .
As the use of these devices has grown , health care providers have been faced with managing clinically significant gastrointestinal bleeding in this population .
Gastrointestinal bleeding is not uncommon and is reported to occur in 13 % to 44 % of patients treated with ventricular assist devices .
Interestingly , because patients with ventricular assist devices are housed on units accustomed to managing the device , cardiac nurses are often asked about the management of gastrointestinal bleeding .
This article describes the possible causes of , the array of diagnostic procedures for , and treatments for this complication .
It is critical to develop an understanding of this topic so cardiac nurses can partner with other subspecialty groups to manage this population .
Management of end stage heart failure Heart failure is a major public health problem , with a patient population of at least 10 million in Europe and approximately 5 million in North America .
Because of its age ‐ dependent increase in incidence and prevalence , heart failure is one of the leading causes of death and hospitalisation among the elderly .
As a consequence of the worldwide increase in life expectancy , and due to improvements in the treatment of heart failure in recent years , the proportion of patients that reach an advanced phase of the disease , so ‐ called end stage , refractory or terminal heart failure , is steadily growing .
Patients with end stage heart failure fall into stage D of the ABCD classification of the American College of Cardiology ( ACC ) / American Heart Association ( AHA ) , and class III – IV of the New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) functional classification ; they are characterised by advanced structural heart disease and pronounced symptoms of heart failure at rest or upon minimal physical exertion , despite maximal medical treatment according to current guidelines .
This patient population has a 1 ‐ year mortality rate of approximately 50 % and requires special therapeutic interventions .
Every attempt should be made to identify and correct reversible causes for a worsening of heart failure , such as poor patient compliance , myocardial ischaemia , tachy ‐ or bradyarrhythmias , valvular regurgitation , pulmonary embolism , infection , or renal dysfunction .
In this article , we describe current strategies for the treatment of end stage heart failure .
Potent inhibition of L-type Ca2 + currents by a Rad variant associated with congestive heart failure .
Ca ( 2 + ) influx via L-type voltage-gated Ca ( 2 + ) channels supports the plateau phase of ventricular action potentials and is the trigger for excitation-contraction ( EC ) coupling in the myocardium .
Rad , a member of the RGK ( Rem , Rem2 , Rad , Gem / Kir ) family of monomeric G proteins , regulates ventricular action potential duration and EC coupling gain through its ability to inhibit cardiac L-type channel activity .
In this study , we have investigated the potential dysfunction of a naturally occurring Rad variant ( Q66P ) that has been associated with congestive heart failure in humans .
Specifically , we have tested whether Rad Q66P limits , or even eliminates , the inhibitory actions of Rad on CaV1.2 and CaV1.3 , the two L-type channel isoforms known to be expressed in the heart .
We have found that mouse Rad Q65P ( the murine equivalent of human Rad Q66P ) inhibits L-type currents conducted by CaV1.2 or CaV1.3 channels as potently as wild-type Rad ( &gt; 95 % inhibition of both channels ) .
In addition , Rad Q65P attenuates the gating movement of both channels as effectively as wild-type Rad , indicating that the Q65P substitution does not differentially impair any of the three described modes of L-type channel inhibition by RGK proteins .
Thus , we conclude that if Rad Q66P contributes to cardiomyopathy , it does so via a mechanism that is not related to its ability to inhibit L-type channel-dependent processes per se .
However , our results do not rule out the possibility that decreased expression , mistargeting or altered regulation of Rad Q66P may reduce the RGK protein &apos;s efficacy in vivo .
A young adult Jehovah &apos;s Witness with severe anemia .
Two of the most ethically complex situations in pediatrics are those involving families whose religious beliefs preclude the provision of life-sustaining treatment and those involving young adults who have reached the age of legal majority and who face decisions about life-sustaining treatment .
This month &apos;s &quot; Ethics Rounds &quot; presents a case in which these 2 complexities overlapped .
An 18-year-old Jehovah &apos;s Witness with sickle cell disease has life-threatening anemia .
She is going into heart failure .
Her doctors urgently recommend blood transfusions .
The young woman and her family adamantly refuse .
Should the doctors let her die ?
Is there any alternative ?
Composite quality measures for common inpatient medical conditions .
BACKGROUND : Public reporting on quality aims to help patients select better hospitals .
However , individual quality measures are suboptimal in identifying superior and inferior hospitals based on outcome performance .
OBJECTIVE : To combine structure , process , and outcome measures into an empirically derived composite quality measure for heart failure ( HF ) , acute myocardial infarction ( AMI ) , and pneumonia ( PNA ) .
To assess how well the composite measure predicts future high and low performers , and explains variance in future hospital mortality .
RESEARCH DESIGN : Using national Medicare data , we created a cohort of older patients treated at an acute care hospital for HF ( n = 1,203,595 ) , AMI ( n = 625,595 ) , or PNA ( n = 1,234,299 ) .
We ranked hospitals on the basis of their July 2005 to June 2008 performance on the composite .
We then estimated the odds of future ( July to December 2009 ) 30-day , risk-adjusted mortality at the worst versus best quintile of hospitals .
We repeated this analysis using 2005-2008 performance on existing quality indicators , including mortality .
RESULTS : The composite ( vs. Hospital Compare ) explained 68 % ( vs. 39 % ) of variation in future AMI mortality rates .
In 2009 , if an AMI patient had chosen a hospital in the worst versus best quintile of performance using 2005-2008 composite ( vs. Hospital Compare ) rankings , he or she would have had 1.61 ( vs. 1.39 ) times the odds of dying in 30 days ( P-value for difference &lt; 0.001 ) .
Results were similar for HF and PNA .
CONCLUSIONS : Composite measures of quality for HF , AMI , and PNA performed better than existing measures at explaining variation in future mortality and predicting future high and low performers .
Race influences the safety and efficacy of spironolactone in severe heart failure .
BACKGROUND : The incidence of hyperkalemia caused by mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists may vary by race , but whether race influences efficacy of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists in heart failure ( HF ) is unknown .
METHODS AND RESULTS : We assessed hyperkalemia and outcomes in African Americans ( AAs ; n = 120 ) and non-AAs ( n = 1543 ; white 93 % ) with New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) class III or IV HF and left ventricular dysfunction who were randomized to spironolactone , titrated to 25 or 50 mg daily or placebo , in the Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study ( RALES ) .
AA participants were significantly younger , less likely to have an ischemic HF pathogenesis , more likely to be NYHA functional class IV , and more likely to have a higher estimated glomerular filtration rate and heart rate , less hypertension , diabetes mellitus , or history of myocardial infarction compared with non-AA participants .
Potassium increased with spironolactone in non-AAs ( 4.29 ± 0.5-4.55 ± 0.49 mmol / L ) but not in AAs ( 4.32 ± 0.54-4.31 ± 0.49 mmol / L ; race by treatment interaction , P = 0.03 ) during the first month and remained higher throughout the trial .
Compared with AAs , non-AAs were more likely to attain maximal spironolactone dose ( 13.9 % versus 5.8 % ; P = 0.04 ) and had higher rates of hyperkalemia ( potassium &gt; 5.5 mmol / L ; 9.7 % versus 4.2 % ; P &lt; 0.046 ) , as well as lower rates of hypokalemia ( potassium &lt; 3.5 mmol / L ; 5.6 % versus 17.9 % ; P &lt; 0.001 ) .
After adjustment for differences in baseline characteristics and achieved study drug dose , spironolactone reduced the combined end point of death or hospitalization for HF in non-AAs ( hazard ratio , 0.63 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.55-0.73 ) but not in AAs ( hazard ratio , 1.07 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.67-1.71 ; P value for interaction = 0.032 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : AAs with HF exhibited less hyperkalemia and more hypokalemia with spironolactone compared with non-AAs and seemed to derive less clinical benefit .
These hypothesis-generating findings suggest that safety and efficacy of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists may differ by race .
Global proteomics and pathway analysis of pressure-overload-induced heart failure and its attenuation by mitochondrial-targeted peptides .
BACKGROUND : We investigated the protective effects of mitochondrial-targeted antioxidant and protective peptides , Szeto-Schiller ( SS ) 31 and SS20 , on cardiac function , proteomic remodeling , and signaling pathways .
METHODS AND RESULTS : We applied an improved label-free shotgun proteomics approach to evaluate the global proteomics changes in transverse aortic constriction ( TAC ) -induced heart failure and the associated signaling pathway changes using ingenuity pathway analysis .
We found that 538 proteins significantly changed after TAC , which mapped to 53 pathways .
The top pathways were in the categories of actin cytoskeleton , mitochondrial function , intermediate metabolism , glycolysis / gluconeogenesis , and citrate cycle .
Concomitant treatment with SS31 ameliorated the congestive heart failure phenotypes and mitochondrial damage induced by TAC , in parallel with global attenuation of mitochondrial proteome changes , with an average of 84 % protection of mitochondrial and 69 % of nonmitochondrial protein changes .
This included significant amelioration of all the ingenuity pathway analysis noted above .
SS20 had only modest effects on heart failure and this tracked with only partial attenuation of global proteomics changes ; furthermore , actin cytoskeleton pathways were significantly protected in SS20 , whereas mitochondrial and metabolic pathways essentially were not .
CONCLUSIONS : This study elucidates the signaling pathways significantly changed in pressure-overload-induced heart failure .
The global attenuation of TAC-induced proteomic alterations by the mitochondrial-targeted peptide SS31 suggests that perturbed mitochondrial function may be an upstream signal to many of the pathway alterations in TAC and supports the potential clinical application of mitochondrial-targeted peptide drugs for the treatment heart failure .
Does reducing length of stay increase rehospitalization of medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries discharged to skilled nursing facilities ?
OBJECTIVES : To analyze the relationship between length of stay and rehospitalization .
DESIGN : Retrospective cohort study .
SETTING : Six thousand five hundred thirty-seven hospitals nationwide from January 1999 through September 2005 .
PARTICIPANTS : Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries associated with 2,101,481 hospitalizations .
MEASUREMENTS : Thirty-day rehospitalization derived from Medicare hospital claims using the implementation of Medicare &apos;s post-acute care transfer policy as a quasi-experiment .
RESULTS : Medicare &apos;s post-acute care transfer policy led to immediate declines in length of stay .
A 1-day decrease in length of stay was associated with an absolute increase in 30-day rehospitalization of 1.56 percentage points ( 95 % confidence interval ( CI ) = 0.30-2.82 ) for acute myocardial infarction ( AMI ) with major complications and 0.81 percentage points ( 95 % CI = 0.03-1.60 ) for kidney infection or urinary tract infection ( UTI ) without major complications .
Individuals hospitalized for AMI without major complications , heart failure , or kidney infection or UTI with major complications had no increase in 30-day rehospitalization .
CONCLUSION : A 1-day reduction in hospital length of stay was not consistently associated with a higher rate of rehospitalization .
Aldosterone antagonism in heart failure Aldosterone , a neurohormone known to affect electrolytes , has recently been implicated as playing a major role in the progression of heart failure , particularly in patients with systolic dysfunction .
Major clinical trials designed to analyze clinical outcomes using an aldosterone antagonist have been done in two groups with heart failure .
The first was the Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study , which was done in symptomatic chronic advanced heart failure patients and showed that an aldosterone antagonist , spironolactone , reduced mortality significantly compared with placebo .
Very few of these patients were on standard therapy with beta blockade .
Another study , the Eplerenone Post myocardial infarction Heart failure Efficacy and SUrvival Study ( EPHESUS ) , done in post-myocardial infarction patients with heart failure , demonstrated a significant reduction in mortality and hospitalizations for patients randomized to the aldosterone antagonist eplerenone .
These trial results provide the background for aldosterone antagonist therapy in chronic advanced heart failure patients as well as post-myocardial infarction heart failure patients with reduced ejection .
Improving survival rates of patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in Tuscany over 3 decades : impact of evidence-based management .
BACKGROUND : Contemporary therapeutic options have led to substantial improvement in survival of patients with heart failure .
However , limited evidence is available specifically on idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy .
We thus examined changes in prognosis of a large idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy cohort systematically followed during the past 30 years .
METHODS AND RESULTS : From 1977 to 2011 , 603 consecutive patients ( age , 53 ± 12 years ; 73 % men ; left ventricular ejection fraction , 32 ± 10 % ) fulfilling World Health Organization criteria for idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy , including negative coronary angiography , were followed up for 8.8 ± 6.3 years .
Patients were subdivided in 4 enrollment periods on the basis of heart failure treatment eras : ( 1 ) 1977-1984 ( n = 66 ) ; ( 2 ) 1985-1990 ( n = 102 ) ; ( 3 ) 1991-2000 ( n = 197 ) ; ( 4 ) 2001-2011 ( n = 238 ) .
Rates of patients receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors / angiotensin receptors blockers , β-blockers , and devices at final evaluation increased from 56 % , 12 % , 8 % ( period 1 ) to 97 % , 86 % , 17 % ( period 4 ) , respectively ( P &lt; 0.05 ) .
There was a trend toward enrollment of older patients with less severe left ventricular dilatation and dysfunction during the years .
During follow-up , 271 patients ( 45 % ) reached a combined end point including death ( heart failure related , n = 142 ; sudden death , n = 71 ; and noncardiac , n = 22 ) or cardiac transplant ( n = 36 ) .
A more recent enrollment period represented the most powerful independent predictor of favorable outcome { period 2 versus 1 ( hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; , 0.64 ; P = 0.04 ) , period 3 versus 1 ( HR , 0.35 ; P &lt; 0.001 ) , period 4 versus 1 ( HR , 0.14 ; P &lt; 001 ) } .
Each period was associated with a 42 % risk reduction versus the previous one ( HR , 0.58 ; 95 % confidence interval , 0.50-0.67 ; P &lt; 0.001 ) , reflecting marked decreases in heart failure-related mortality and sudden death ( period 4 versus 1 : HR , 0.10 ; P &lt; 001 and HR , 0.13 ; P &lt; 0.0001 , respectively ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Evidence-based treatment has led to dramatic improvement in the prognosis of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy during the past 3 decades .
The benefits of controlled randomized trials can be replicated in the real world , emphasizing the importance of tailored follow-up and long-term continuity of care .
Prognostic value of indeterminable anaerobic threshold in heart failure .
BACKGROUND : In patients with heart failure ( HF ) , during maximal cardiopulmonary exercise test , anaerobic threshold ( AT ) is not always identified .
We evaluated whether this finding has a prognostic meaning .
METHODS AND RESULTS : We recruited and prospectively followed up , in 14 dedicated HF units , 3058 patients with systolic ( left ventricular ejection fraction &lt; 40 % ) HF in stable clinical conditions , New York Heart Association class I to III , who underwent clinical , laboratory , echocardiographic , and cardiopulmonary exercise test investigations at study enrollment .
We excluded 921 patients who did not perform a maximal exercise , based on lack of achievement of anaerobic metabolism ( peak respiratory quotient ≤ 1.05 ) .
Primary study end point was a composite of cardiovascular death and urgent cardiac transplant , and secondary end point was all-cause death .
Median follow-up was 3.01 ( 1.39-4.98 ) years .
AT was identified in 1935 out of 2137 patients ( 90.54 % ) .
At multivariable logistic analysis , failure in detecting AT resulted significantly in reduced peak oxygen uptake and higher metabolic exercise and cardiac and kidney index score value , a powerful prognostic composite HF index ( P &lt; 0.001 ) .
At multivariable analysis , the following variables were significantly associated with primary study end point : peak oxygen uptake ( % pred ; P &lt; 0.001 ; hazard ratio &#91; HR &#93; = 0.977 ; confidence interval &#91; CI &#93; = 0.97-0.98 ) , ventilatory efficiency slope ( P = 0.01 ; HR = 1.02 ; CI = 1.01-1.03 ) , hemoglobin ( P &lt; 0.05 ; HR = 0.931 ; CI = 0.87-1.00 ) , left ventricular ejection fraction ( P &lt; 0.001 ; HR = 0.948 ; CI = 0.94-0.96 ) , renal function ( modification of diet in renal disease ; P &lt; 0.001 ; HR = 0.990 ; CI = 0.98-0.99 ) , sodium ( P &lt; 0.05 ; HR = 0.967 ; CI = 0.94-0.99 ) , and AT nonidentification ( P &lt; 0.05 ; HR = 1.41 ; CI = 1.06-1.89 ) .
Nonidentification of AT remained associated to prognosis also when compared with metabolic exercise and cardiac and kidney index score ( P &lt; 0.01 ; HR = 1.459 ; CI = 1.09-1.10 ) .
Similar results were obtained for the secondary study end point .
CONCLUSIONS : The inability to identify AT most often occurs in patients with severe HF , and it has an independent prognostic role in HF .
Cardiorespiratory fitness , body mass index , and heart failure mortality in men : Cooper Center Longitudinal Study .
BACKGROUND : We evaluated the individual and joint associations among cardiorespiratory fitness ( CRF ) , body mass index , and heart failure ( HF ) mortality , as well as the additive effect of an increasing number of cardiovascular risk factors on HF mortality in fit versus unfit men .
METHODS AND RESULTS : A total of 44 674 men without a history of cardiovascular disease underwent a baseline examination between 1971 and 2010 .
Measures included body mass index and CRF quantified as duration of maximal treadmill exercise testing .
Participants were divided into age-specific low , moderate , and high CRF categories .
Hazard ratios were computed with Cox regression analysis .
During a mean follow-up of 19.8 ± 10.4 years , 153 HF deaths occurred .
Adjusted hazard ratios across high , moderate , and low CRF categories were 1.0 , 1.63 , and 3.97 , respectively , whereas those of normal , overweight , and obese body mass index categories were 1.0 , 1.56 , and 3.71 , respectively ( P for trend &lt; 0.0001 for each ) .
When grouped into categories of fit and unfit ( upper 80 % and lower 20 % of CRF distribution , respectively ) , hazard ratios were significantly lower in fit compared with unfit men in normal and overweight body mass index strata ( P &lt; 0.002 ) but not in obese men .
Within men matched for the same number of HF risk factors , fit men had significantly lower HF mortality than unfit men ( P ≤ 0.02 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Higher baseline CRF is associated with lower HF mortality risk in men , regardless of the number of HF risk factors present .
Men should be counseled on physical activity with the goal of achieving at least a moderate level of CRF , thereby presumably decreasing their risk of HF mortality .
Cardiac insulin-resistance and decreased mitochondrial energy production precede the development of systolic heart failure after pressure-overload hypertrophy .
BACKGROUND : Cardiac hypertrophy is accompanied by significant alterations in energy metabolism .
Whether these changes in energy metabolism precede and contribute to the development of heart failure in the hypertrophied heart is not clear .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Mice were subjected to cardiac hypertrophy secondary to pressure-overload as a result of an abdominal aortic constriction ( AAC ) .
The rates of energy substrate metabolism were assessed in isolated working hearts obtained 1 , 2 , and 3 weeks after AAC .
Mice subjected to AAC demonstrated a progressive development of cardiac hypertrophy .
In vivo assessment of cardiac function ( via echocardiography ) demonstrated diastolic dysfunction by 2 weeks ( 20 % increase in E / E &apos; ) , and systolic dysfunction by 3 weeks ( 16 % decrease in % ejection fraction ) .
Marked cardiac insulin-resistance by 2 weeks post-AAC was evidenced by a significant decrease in insulin-stimulated rates of glycolysis and glucose oxidation , and plasma membrane translocation of glucose transporter 4 .
Overall ATP production rates were decreased at 2 and 3 weeks post-AAC ( by 37 % and 47 % , respectively ) because of a reduction in mitochondrial oxidation of glucose , lactate , and fatty acids that was not accompanied by an increase in myocardial glycolysis rates .
Reduced mitochondrial complex V activity was evident at 3 weeks post-AAC , concomitant with a reduction in the ratio of phosphocreatine to ATP .
CONCLUSIONS : The development of cardiac insulin-resistance and decreased mitochondrial oxidative metabolism are early metabolic changes in the development of cardiac hypertrophy , which create an energy deficit that may contribute to the progression from hypertrophy to heart failure .
The reality of heart failure in Latin America .
Heart failure ( HF ) data in Latin America ( LA ) were reviewed to guide health service planning in the prevention and treatment of HF .
The HF epidemiology and the adequacy of relevant health service provision related to HF in LA are not well delineated .
A systematic search of the electronic databases and the World Health Organization website was undertaken for HF in LA .
LA countries have reduced gross income and lower total expenditure on health per capita .
LA is a heterogeneous region with HF risk factors of developed and nondeveloped countries , including lower risk of raised blood glucose levels , obesity , tobacco , and aging , whereas systemic hypertension ( SH ) , rheumatic fever , and Chagas &apos; disease ( C &apos;D ) are higher in LA .
Main etiologies of HF in LA are idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy ( from 1.3 % to 37 % ) , C &apos;D ( from 1.3 % to 21 % ) , ischemic ( from 68 % to 17 % ) , SH ( from 14 % to 76 % ) , valvular ( from 3 % to 22 % ) , and alcohol related ( from 1.1 % to 8 % ) .
The prognosis of C &apos;D HF is worse than for other etiologies .
Chronic HF is the cause of death in 6.3 % of cases .
Decompensated HF is the main cause of cardiovascular hospitalization .
The prevalence of systolic HF varies from 64 % to 69 % .
LA is under the awful paradox of having the HF risk factors and HF epidemiology of developed countries with the added factors of SH , C &apos;D , and rheumatic fever .
Overall , in the scenario of lower total expenditure on health per capita and lower gross national income per capita , new strategies are essential for prevention and treatment of HF in LA .
A CLCNKA polymorphism ( rs10927887 ; p.Arg83Gly ) previously linked to heart failure is associated with the estimated glomerular filtration rate in the RENASTUR cohort .
A total of 569 individuals aged 55-85 and Caucasian were genotyped for SNP rs10927887 in the Ka renal chloride channel gene ( CLCNKA ) .
The following variables were significantly associated with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of ( eGFR ) &lt; 60 ml / min . / 1.73 m ( 2 ) : age , type 2 diabetes , total cholesterol , LDL-cholesterol , and the CLCNKA GG genotype ( p = 0.03 ; OR = 1.65 , 95 % CI = 1.04-2.62 ) .
This novel finding could partly explain the reported greater risk of heart failure linked to the CLCNKA SNP , but requires confirmation on other populations .
Assessing the link between air pollution and heart failure .
Ambient air pollution is a well-recognised risk factor for cardiovascular health , and it has been shown to be an important trigger of acute myocardial infarction .
In The Lancet , Anoop Shah and colleagues provide a new systematic review of the effects of air pollution on heart failure , a common disorder associated with high morbidity and mortality , especially in elderly people .
Physicians and professionals in public health should be aware that the air pollution experienced in most urban and industrial areas can aggravate cardiovascular health and lead to hospitalisation and death .
Cardiac overexpression of Mammalian enabled ( Mena ) exacerbates heart failure in mice .
Mammalian enabled ( Mena ) is a key regulator of cytoskeletal actin dynamics , which has been implicated in heart failure ( HF ) .
We have previously demonstrated that cardiac Mena deletion produced cardiac dysfunction with conduction abnormalities and hypertrophy .
Moreover , elevated Mena expression correlates with HF in human and animal models , yet the precise role of Mena in cardiac pathophysiology is unclear .
In these studies , we evaluated mice with cardiac myocyte-specific Mena overexpression ( TTA / TgTetMena ) comparable to that observed in cardiac pathology .
We found that the hearts of TTA / TgTetMena mice were functionally and morphologically comparable to wild-type littermates , except for mildly increased heart mass in the transgenic mice .
Interestingly , TTA / TgTetMena mice were particularly susceptible to cardiac injury , as these animals experienced pronounced decreases in ejection fraction and fractional shortening as well as heart dilatation and hypertrophy after transverse aortic constriction ( TAC ) .
By &quot; turning off &quot; Mena overexpression in TTA / TgTetMena mice either immediately prior to or immediately after TAC surgery , we discovered that normalizing Mena levels eliminated cardiac hypertrophy in TTA / TgTetMena animals but did not preclude post-TAC cardiac functional deterioration .
These findings indicate that hearts with increased levels of Mena fare worse when subjected to cardiac injury and suggest that Mena contributes to HF pathophysiology .
Future of advanced heart failure and mechanical support devices : A Cardiology-Cardiovascular Surgery Consensus Report Heart failure is a progressive disease .
A considerable number of patients eventually reach an advanced or terminal phase , in spite of developments in diagnostic procedure , alternative treatments that can slow progression , management , and follow-up .
In addition to palliative care of patients in the terminal phase , accurate recognition of advanced disease is vital in the determination of therapeutic options .
Overall management of patients with heart failure requires the collaboration of professionals from multiple disciplines .
Still , patients with advanced heart failure should be managed by a &quot; heart team , &quot; as indicated by guidelines ; communication and collaboration among cardiologists , cardiovascular surgeons , and other medical staff responsible for patient care is necessary .
While our country has physicians experienced in the management of patients with advanced heart failure , these professionals are not distributed evenly across the country , and equitable access to therapeutic options is not provided .
Hence , progress has yet to be made regarding appropriate referrals and patient circulation .
The aims of the present consensus report are to strengthen the connection between certified , experienced centers and those that care for patients irrespective of disease phase and healthcare staff , as well as to raise awareness and provide information regarding conditions in Turkey .
Risk for Hospitalized Heart Failure Among New Users of Saxagliptin , Sitagliptin , and Other Antihyperglycemic Drugs : A Retrospective Cohort Study .
BACKGROUND : Recent postmarketing trials produced conflicting results about the risk for hospitalized heart failure ( hHF ) associated with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 ( DPP-4 ) inhibitors , creating uncertainty about the safety of these antihyperglycemic agents .
OBJECTIVE : To examine the associations of hHF with saxagliptin and sitagliptin .
DESIGN : Population-based , retrospective , new-user cohort study .
SETTING : 18 health insurance and health system data partners in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration &apos;s Mini-Sentinel program .
PATIENTS : Patients aged 18 years or older with type 2 diabetes who initiated therapy with saxagliptin , sitagliptin , pioglitazone , second-generation sulfonylureas , or long-acting insulin products from 2006 to 2013 .
MEASUREMENTS : Hospitalized HF , identified by International Classification of Diseases , Ninth Revision , Clinical Modification codes 402.x1 , 404.x1 , 404.x3 , and 428.xx recorded as the principal discharge diagnosis .
RESULTS : 78 553 saxagliptin users and 298 124 sitagliptin users contributed an average of 7 to 9 months of follow-up data to 1 or more pairwise comparisons .
The risk for hHF was not higher with DPP-4 inhibitors than with the other study drugs .
The hazard ratios from the disease risk score ( DRS ) -stratified analyses were 0.83 ( 95 % CI , 0.70 to 0.99 ) for saxagliptin versus sitagliptin , 0.63 ( CI , 0.47 to 0.85 ) for saxagliptin versus pioglitazone , 0.69 ( CI , 0.54 to 0.87 ) for saxagliptin versus sulfonylureas , and 0.61 ( CI , 0.50 to 0.73 ) for saxagliptin versus insulin .
The DRS-stratified hazard ratios were 0.74 ( CI , 0.64 to 0.85 ) for sitagliptin versus pioglitazone , 0.86 ( CI , 0.77 to 0.95 ) for sitagliptin versus sulfonylureas , and 0.71 ( CI , 0.64 to 0.78 ) for sitagliptin versus insulin .
Results from the 1 : 1 propensity score-matched analyses were similar .
Results were also similar in subgroups of patients with and without prior cardiovascular disease and in a subgroup defined by the 2 highest DRS deciles .
LIMITATION : Residual confounding and short follow-up .
CONCLUSION : In this large cohort study , a higher risk for hHF was not observed in users of saxagliptin or sitagliptin compared with other selected antihyperglycemic agents .
Effectiveness of implementation strategies in improving physician adherence to guideline recommendations in heart failure : a systematic review protocol Introduction The uptake of Clinical Practice Guideline ( CPG ) recommendations that improve outcomes in heart failure ( HF ) remains suboptimal .
We will conduct a systematic review to identify implementation strategies that improve physician adherence to class I recommendations , those with clear evidence that benefits outweigh the risks .
We will use American , Canadian and European HF guidelines as our reference .
Methods and analysis We will conduct a literature search in the databases of MEDLINE , EMBASE , HEALTHSTAR , CINAHL , Cochrane Library , Campbell Collaboration , Joanna Briggs Institute Evidence Based Practice , Centre for Reviews and Dissemination and Evidence Based Practice Centres .
We will include prospective studies evaluating implementation interventions aimed at improving uptake of class I CPG recommendations in HF .
We will extract data in duplicate .
We will classify interventions according to their level of application ( ie , provider , organisation , systems level ) and common underlying characteristics ( eg , education , decision-support , financial incentives ) using the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care Taxonomy .
We will assess the impact of the intervention on adherence to the CPGs .
Outcomes will include proportion of eligible patients who were : prescribed a CPG-recommended pharmacological treatment ; referred for device consideration ; provided self-care education at discharge ; and provided left ventricular function assessment .
We will include clinical outcomes such as hospitalisations , readmissions and mortality , if data is available .
We will identify the common elements of successful and failing interventions , and examine the context in which they were applied , using the Process Redesign contextual framework .
We will synthesise the results narratively and , if appropriate , will pool results for meta-analysis .
Discussion and dissemination In this review , we will assess the impact of implementation strategies and contextual factors on physician adherence to HF CPGs .
We will explore why some interventions may succeed in one setting and fail in another .
We will disseminate our findings through briefing reports , publications and presentations .
Patient perceptions of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation discussions : A qualitative study .
BACKGROUND : There is a class I recommendation for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation discussions to occur between physicians and heart failure patients .
Few studies have reported the patient &apos;s perspective on the timing of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation discussions .
AIM : To determine patient awareness , preferences and timing of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation discussions .
DESIGN : Grounded theory was used to collect and analyze interview data from 25 heart failure patients with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator .
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS : Patients with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator , from the Heart Function Clinic at University Health Network ( Toronto , Canada ) .
RESULTS : The sample ( n = 25 ) was predominately male ( 76 % ) with an average age of 62 years .
Patients identified three stages where they felt implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation should be discussed : ( 1 ) prior to implantation , ( 2 ) with any significant deterioration but while they were of sound mind to engage in and communicate their preferences and ( 3 ) at end of life , where patients wished further review of their previously established preferences and decisions about implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation .
Most patients ( n = 17 , 68 % ) said they would consider deactivation , six ( 24 % ) were undecided and two ( 8 % ) were adamant they would never turn it off .
CONCLUSION : The patient preferences identified in this study support the need to include information on implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation at implant , with change in clinical status and within broader discussions about end-of-life treatment preferences .
Using this process to help patients determine and communicate their implantable cardioverter-defibrillator deactivation preferences may reduce the number of patients experiencing distressing implantable cardioverter-defibrillator shocks at end of life .
Comment on &quot; Baroreflex Activation Therapy for the Treatment of Heart Failure With a Reduced Ejection Fraction &quot; OBJECTIVES : The objective of this clinical trial was to assess the safety and efficacy of carotid baroreflex activation therapy ( BAT ) in advanced heart failure ( HF ) .
BACKGROUND : Increased sympathetic and decreased parasympathetic activity contribute to HF symptoms and disease progression .
BAT results in centrally mediated reduction of sympathetic outflow and increased parasympathetic activity .
METHODS : Patients with New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) functional class III HF and ejection fractions &lt; 35 % on chronic stable guideline-directed medical therapy ( GDMT ) were enrolled at 45 centers in the United States , Canada , and Europe .
They were randomly assigned to receive ongoing GDMT alone ( control group ) or ongoing GDMT plus BAT ( treatment group ) for 6 months .
The primary safety end point was system- and procedure-related major adverse neurological and cardiovascular events .
The primary efficacy end points were changes in NYHA functional class , quality-of-life score , and 6-minute hall walk distance .
RESULTS : One hundred forty-six patients were randomized , 70 to control and 76 to treatment .
The major adverse neurological and cardiovascular event-free rate was 97.2 % ( lower 95 % confidence bound 91.4 % ) .
Patients assigned to BAT , compared with control group patients , experienced improvements in the distance walked in 6 min ( 59.6 ± 14 m vs. 1.5 ± 13.2 m ; p = 0.004 ) , quality-of-life score ( – 17.4 ± 2.8 points vs. 2.1 ± 3.1 points ; p &lt; 0.001 ) , and NYHA functional class ranking ( p = 0.002 for change in distribution ) .
BAT significantly reduced N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide ( p = 0.02 ) and was associated with a trend toward fewer days hospitalized for HF ( p = 0.08 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : BAT is safe and improves functional status , quality of life , exercise capacity , N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide , and possibly the burden of heart failure hospitalizations in patients with GDMT-treated NYHA functional class III HF .
Preliminary report of using cardiopulmonary exercise testing guide exercise rehabilitation in patients with chronic heart failure OBJECTIVE : The exercise rehabilitation in patient with chronic heart failure ( CHF ) is standard clinical practice , but it is rare using CardioPulmonary Exercise Testing ( CPET ) guide to prescribe exercise rehabilitation in China .
METHODS : We performed symptom limited maximal CPET in 10 patients with CHF , randomly divided into two groups : 5 patients as control without exercise and 5 exercise patients used Δ50 % W intensity to exercise 30 min / d , 5 d / w , x12 w . Before and after 12 w rehabilitation , we evaluated functions .
RESULTS : There were no significant difference between two groups patients ( P &gt; 0.05 ) .
The exercise duration was increased from 8 min to 23 min after rehabilitation ( P &lt; 0.001 ) ; distance 6 minutes walking was increased from 394 m to 470 m ( P &lt; 0.05 ) ; score of Minnesota quality of life was decreased from 25 to 3 in exercise group ( P &lt; 0.01 ) .
However , there were nosignificant changes in control group ( P &gt; 0.05 ) and their changes were smaller than those in exercise group ( P &lt; 0.01 ) .
CONCLUSION : The CPET guiding exercise rehabilitation is safe and effective for patients with CHF .
Management of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
Heart failure affects nearly one million people in the UK .
Half of these patients have normal , or near normal , left ventricular ejection fraction and are classified as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFpEF ) .
Newer imaging techniques have confirmed that systolic function in HFpEF patients is not completely normal , with reduced long axis function and extensive but subtle changes on exercise .
Patients are likely to be older women with a history of hypertension .
Other cardiovascular risk factors , such as diabetes mellitus , atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease are prevalent in the HFpEF population .
Clinical symptoms and signs in HFpEF are often nonspecific although the primary symptoms are breathlessness , fatigue and fluid retention .
There is still no single diagnostic test for HFpEF and the cornerstone in the assessment remains a thorough medical history and physical examination .
The duration and extent of the symptoms are relevant and it is useful to classify patients according to the NYHA functional assessment .
Physical examination should include the patient &apos;s BMI and weight , heart rate and rhythm , lying and standing blood pressure and auscultation to rule out valvular disease and pulmonary congestion .
Estimating the jugular venous pressure and the presence of peripheral oedema allows assessment of the patient &apos;s volume status .
Patients with heart failure should be referred to heart failure nurses and have follow-up with local cardiology services as these have both been shown to reduce mortality .
Playing it safe : exercise and cardiovascular health .
Regular physical activity controls acquired cardiovascular risk factors such as obesity , diabetes mellitus , hypertension and hyperlipidaemia .
Exercise is generally associated with a 50 % reduction in adverse events from coronary artery disease ( CAD ) .
The benefits of exercise extend well beyond the cardiovascular system .
Recent evidence suggests that exercise prevents cell senescence , and active individuals are at lower risk of developing certain malignancies including cancer of the prostate and the colon , osteoporosis , depression and dementia .
Individuals who exercise regularly extend their life expectancy by three to seven years .
Healthy individuals should engage in 150 minutes of moderate-intensity , aerobic exercise per week .
Recent studies have demonstrated that even lower volumes of exercise below these recommendations confer health benefits , which is highly relevant to individuals with established cardiac disease including heart failure .
Sudden cardiac death in athletes under 35 is rare with.estimates ranging from 1 in 50,000 to 1 in 200,000 .
Hereditary and congenital abnormalities of the heart are the most common cause of nontraumatic death during sport in young athletes .
In middle-aged recreational athletes more than 90 % of sudden cardiac deaths occur in males and more than 90 % are caused by atherosclerotic CAD .
The AHA and the ESC advocate pre-participation screening of young athletes .
The ECG has the ability to detect congenital accessory pathways and ion channelopathies , and is frequently abnormal in individuals with cardiomyopathy .
Screening with a 12-lead ECG in older athletes is of limited value given the overwhelming contribution of atherosclerotic CAD to sudden cardiac death .
Robot-assisted training for heart failure patients - a small pilot study .
OBJECTIVE : The objective of this study was assess robot-assisted gait therapy with the Lokomat ® system in heart failure patients .
METHODS : Patients ( n = 5 ) with stable heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 45 % completed a four-week aerobic training period with three trainings per week and an integrated dynamic resistance training of the lower limbs .
Patients underwent testing of cardiac and inflammatory biomarkers .
A cardiopulmonary exercise test , a quality of life score and an evaluation of the muscular strength by measuring the peak quadriceps force was performed .
RESULTS : No adverse events occurred .
The combined training resulted in an improvement in peak work rate ( range : 6 % to 36 % ) and peak quadriceps force ( range : 3 % to 80 % ) in all participants .
Peak oxygen consumption ( range : – 3 % to + 61 % ) increased in three , and oxygen pulse ( range : – 7 % to + 44 % ) in four of five patients .
The quality of life assessment indicated better well-being in all participants .
NT-ProBNP ( + 233 to – 733 ng / ml ) and the inflammatory biomarkers ( hsCRP and IL6 ) decreased in four of five patients ( IL 6 : + 0.5 to – 2 mg / l , hsCRP : + 0.2 to – 6.5 mg / l ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Robot-assisted gait therapy with the Lokomat ® System is feasible in heart failure patients and was safe in this trial .
The combined aerobic and resistance training intervention with augmented feedback resulted in benefits in exercise capacity , muscle strength and quality of life , as well as an improvement of cardiac ( NT-ProBNP ) and inflammatory ( IL6 , hsCRP ) biomarkers .
Results can only be considered as preliminary and need further validation in larger studies .
Psychosocial Factors , Exercise Adherence , and Outcomes in Heart Failure Patients : Insights From Heart Failure : A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training ( HF-ACTION ) .
BACKGROUND : Psychosocial factors may influence adherence with exercise training for heart failure ( HF ) patients .
We aimed to describe the association between social support and barriers to participation with exercise adherence and clinical outcomes .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Of patients enrolled in Heart Failure : A Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training ( HF-ACTION ) , 2279 ( 97.8 % ) completed surveys to assess social support and barriers to exercise , resulting in the perceived social support score ( PSSS ) and barriers to exercise score ( BTES ) .
Higher PSSS indicated higher levels of social support , whereas higher BTES indicated more barriers to exercise .
Exercise time at 3 and 12 months correlated with PSSS ( r = 0.09 and r = 0.13 , respectively ) and BTES ( r = -0.11 and r = -0.12 , respectively ) , with higher exercise time associated with higher PSSS and lower BTES ( All P &lt; 0.005 ) .
For cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization , there was a significant interaction between the randomization group and BTES ( P = 0.035 ) , which corresponded to a borderline association between increasing BTES and cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization in the exercise group ( hazard ratio 1.25 , 95 % confidence interval 0.99 , 1.59 ) , but no association in the usual care group ( hazard ratio 0.83 , 95 % confidence interval 0.66 , 1.06 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : Poor social support and high barriers to exercise were associated with lower exercise time .
PSSS did not impact the effect of exercise training on outcomes .
However , for cardiovascular death or HF hospitalization , exercise training had a greater impact on patients with lower BTES .
Given that exercise training improves outcomes in HF patients , assessment of perceived barriers may facilitate individualized approaches to implement exercise training therapy in clinical practice .
Heart rate reduction and exercise performance in recent onset heart failure with reduced ejection fraction : arguments for beta-blocker hypo-response .
OBJECTIVE : Beta blockers reduce all-cause mortality and readmissions in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction ( HFrEF ) , which may be explained by their effect on heart rate ( HR ) .
This study assessed the impact of HR reduction with beta blockers on exercise capacity in recent onset HFrEF .
METHODS AND RESULTS : Fifty consecutive patients with recent onset HFrEF ( &lt; 30 days ) performed a standardized exercise protocol with respiratory gas analysis at baseline as well as after 6 and 12 months .
Patients participated in a quality of care programme aiming to achieve guideline-recommended target doses for beta-blocker therapy .
At baseline , 6 and 12 months , 36 % , 70 % and 62 % of patients , respectively , had a resting HR &lt; 70 bpm .
Beta-blocker dose after 12 months was comparable in patients with resting HR &lt; 70 versus ≥ 70 bpm ( P value = 0.631 ) .
However , with similar dose uptitration , the former versus the latter had a significantly larger HR reduction ( 17 ± 22 versus 4 ± 15 bpm ; P value = 0.027 ) .
Peak oxygen consumption ( VO2max ) was significantly higher when resting HR was &lt; 70 versus ≥ 70 bpm ( 17.5 ± 5.5 versus 14.4 ± 3.3 mL / min / kg , respectively ; P value = 0.038 ) .
Similar results were observed after 6 months .
Patients in whom resting HR decreased at follow-up compared to baseline had a 2.0 ± 3.2 mL / min / kg increase in VO2max compared to a 1.2 ± 7.7 mL / min / kg increase in patients who did not demonstrate a lower resting HR ( P value = 0.033 ) .
CONCLUSIONS : In recent onset HFrEF , exercise performance was better when resting HR was controlled &lt; 70 bpm with beta-blocker therapy .
However , despite aggressive dose uptitration , many patients did not achieve this target as they had little HR reduction with beta-blocker therapy .
Unidirectional left-to-right interatrial shunting for treatment of patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction : a safety and proof-of-principle cohort study .
BACKGROUND : In patients with heart failure , interventions to reduce elevated left atrial pressure improve symptoms and reduce the risk of hospital admission .
We aimed to assess the safety and potential efficacy of therapeutic left-to-right interatrial shunting in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction .
METHODS : We did this proof-of-principle cohort study at one centre in Canada .
Patients ( aged ≥ 18 years ) with New York Heart Association ( NYHA ) class III chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction were enrolled under the Canadian special access programme .
Shunt implants were done after transseptal catheterisation with transoesophageal echocardiographic guidance under general anaesthesia .
Patients had clinical and echocardiography evaluations at baseline and months 1 and 3 after shunt implantation .
FINDINGS : Between Oct 10 , 2013 , and March 27 , 2015 , we enrolled ten patients .
The device was successfully implanted in all patients ; no device-related or procedural adverse events occurred during follow-up .
Transoesophageal echocardiography at 1 month showed that all shunts were patent , with no thrombosis or migration .
From baseline to 3 month follow-up , we recorded improvements in NYHA classification ( from class III to class II in seven &#91; 78 % &#93; of nine patients , from class III to class I in one &#91; 11 % &#93; patient , and no change in one &#91; 11 % &#93; patient ; p = 0 · 0004 ) ; quality of life , as assessed by the Duke Activity Status Index ( from a mean score of 13 &#91; SD 6 · 2 &#93; to 24 · 8 &#91; 12 · 9 &#93; ; p = 0 · 016 ) and the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire ( from a mean score of 44 · 3 &#91; SD 9 · 8 &#93; to 79 · 1 &#91; 13 · 0 &#93; ; p = 0 · 0001 ) ; and 6 min walk test distance ( from a mean of 244 m &#91; SD 112 &#93; to 318 m &#91; 134 &#93; ; p = 0 · 016 ) .
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was reduced from a mean of 23 mm Hg ( SD 5 ) at baseline to 17 mm Hg ( 8 ) at 3 months ( p = 0 · 035 ) , with no changes in right atrial pressure , pulmonary arterial pressure , or pulmonary resistance .
No patient was admitted to hospital for worsening heart failure .
One ( 10 % ) patient was admitted to hospital with gastrointestinal bleeding at month 1 ; one ( 10 % ) patient died after incessant ventricular tachycardia storm , which led to terminal heart failure 2 months post-procedure .
INTERPRETATION : This first-in-man experience with an implanted left-to-right interatrial shunt demonstrates initial safety and early beneficial clinical and haemodynamic outcomes in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction .
Further large-scale randomised studies are warranted .
Study PARADIGM-HF - a paradigm shift in the treatment of chronic heart failure Chronic heart failure is a crucial problem of current cardiology .
Despite that , no major development has occurred in the therapy in recent years .
In this regard , first results of studies with ARNI inhibitors ( angiotensin-receptor neprilysin inhibitors ) may be considered hopeful .
Dual inhibition of AT1 receptors and neprilysin blocks renin-angiotensin-aldosteron ( RAS ) axis and concurrently supports natural vasodilatory and diuretic effect of natriuretic peptides .
Large-scale prospective randomized multicenter trial PARADIGM-HF with more than 8000 individuals with stabilized chronic heart failure with systolic dysfunction ( LV EF 40 % , later 35 % ) , mostly in functional class NYHA II-III with elevated BNP / NT-pro BNP has shown 20 % decrease in primary endpoint ( cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart failure ) in a group treated by ARNI ( LCZ696 ; sacubiltril - valsartan ) .
Beneficial effect of ARNI was consistent also for total and cardiovascular mortality , for hospitalization for heart failure and in other pre-specified subgroup analyses , including quality of life .
The treatment was safe , typical adverse event was hypotension , however without a need to interrupt the treatment .
Dual RAS and neprilysin inhibition might thus after long time become a change in stable chronic heart failure with systolic dysfunction treatment &quot; paradigm &quot; .
Czech Republic significantly contributed to this study and all study sites should be congratulated and thanked for their high-quality work provided .
Effect of Caloric Restriction or Aerobic Exercise Training on Peak Oxygen Consumption and Quality of Life in Obese Older Patients With Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction : A Randomized Clinical Trial .
IMPORTANCE : More than 80 % of patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction ( HFPEF ) , the most common form of heart failure among older persons , are overweight or obese .
Exercise intolerance is the primary symptom of chronic HFPEF and a major determinant of reduced quality of life ( QOL ) .
OBJECTIVE : To determine whether caloric restriction ( diet ) or aerobic exercise training ( exercise ) improves exercise capacity and QOL in obese older patients with HFPEF .
DESIGN , SETTING , AND PARTICIPANTS : Randomized , attention-controlled , 2 × 2 factorial trial conducted from February 2009 through November 2014 in an urban academic medical center .
Of 577 initially screened participants , 100 older obese participants ( mean &#91; SD &#93; : age , 67 years &#91; 5 &#93; ; body mass index , 39.3 &#91; 5.6 &#93; ) with chronic , stable HFPEF were enrolled ( 366 excluded by inclusion and exclusion criteria , 31 for other reasons , and 80 declined participation ) .
INTERVENTIONS : Twenty weeks of diet , exercise , or both ; attention control consisted of telephone calls every 2 weeks .
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES : Exercise capacity measured as peak oxygen consumption ( VO2 , mL / kg / min ; co-primary outcome ) and QOL measured by the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure ( MLHF ) Questionnaire ( score range : 0-105 , higher scores indicate worse heart failure-related QOL ; co-primary outcome ) .
RESULTS : Of the 100 enrolled participants , 26 participants were randomized to exercise ; 24 to diet ; 25 to exercise + diet ; 25 to control .
Of these , 92 participants completed the trial .
Exercise attendance was 84 % ( SD , 14 % ) and diet adherence was 99 % ( SD , 1 % ) .
By main effects analysis , peak VO2 was increased significantly by both interventions : exercise , 1.2 mL / kg body mass / min ( 95 % CI , 0.7 to 1.7 ) , P &lt; .001 ; diet , 1.3 mL / kg body mass / min ( 95 % CI , 0.8 to 1.8 ) , P &lt; .001 .
The combination of exercise + diet was additive ( complementary ) for peak VO2 ( joint effect , 2.5 mL / kg / min ) .
There was no statistically significant change in MLHF total score with exercise and with diet ( main effect : exercise , -1 unit &#91; 95 % CI , -8 to 5 &#93; , P = .70 ; diet , -6 units &#91; 95 % CI , -12 to 1 &#93; , P = .08 ) .
The change in peak VO2 was positively correlated with the change in percent lean body mass ( r = 0.32 ; P = .003 ) and the change in thigh muscle : intermuscular fat ratio ( r = 0.27 ; P = .02 ) .
There were no study-related serious adverse events .
Body weight decreased by 7 % ( 7 kg &#91; SD , 1 &#93; ) in the diet group , 3 % ( 4 kg &#91; SD , 1 &#93; ) in the exercise group , 10 % ( 11 kg &#91; SD , 1 &#93; in the exercise + diet group , and 1 % ( 1 kg &#91; SD , 1 &#93; ) in the control group .
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE : Among obese older patients with clinically stable HFPEF , caloric restriction or aerobic exercise training increased peak VO2 , and the effects may be additive .
Neither intervention had a significant effect on quality of life as measured by the MLHF Questionnaire .
Fully Magnetically Levitated Left Ventricular Assist System for Treating Advanced HF : A Multicenter Study .
BACKGROUND : The HeartMate 3 left ventricular assist system ( LVAS ) is intended to provide long-term support to patients with advanced heart failure .
The centrifugal flow pump is designed for enhanced hemocompatibility by incorporating a magnetically levitated rotor with wide blood-flow paths and an artificial pulse .
OBJECTIVES : The aim of this single-arm , prospective , multicenter study was to evaluate the performance and safety of this LVAS .
METHODS : The primary endpoint was 6-month survival compared with INTERMACS ( Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support ) -derived performance goal .
Patients were adults with ejection fraction ≤ 25 % , cardiac index ≤ 2.2 l / min / m ( 2 ) without inotropes or were inotrope-dependent on optimal medical management , or listed for transplant .
RESULTS : Fifty patients were enrolled at 10 centers .
The indications for LVAS support were bridge to transplantation ( 54 % ) or destination therapy ( 46 % ) .
At 6 months , 88 % of patients continued on support , 4 % received transplants , and 8 % died .
Thirty-day mortality was 2 % and 6-month survival 92 % , which exceeded the 88 % performance goal .
Support with the fully magnetically levitated LVAS significantly reduced mortality risk by 66 % compared with the Seattle Heart Failure Model-predicted survival of 78 % ( p = 0.0093 ) .
Key adverse events included reoperation for bleeding ( 14 % ) , driveline infection ( 10 % ) , gastrointestinal bleeding ( 8 % ) , and debilitating stroke ( modified Rankin Score &gt; 3 ) ( 8 % ) .
There were no pump exchanges , pump malfunctions , pump thrombosis , or hemolysis events .
New York Heart Association classification , 6-min walk test , and quality-of-life scores showed progressive and sustained improvement .
CONCLUSIONS : The results show that the fully magnetically levitated centrifugal-flow chronic LVAS is safe , with high 30-day and 6-month survival rates , a favorable adverse event profile , and improved quality of life and functional status .
Tools for Economic Analysis of Patient Management Interventions in Heart Failure Cost-Effectiveness Model : A Web-based program designed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of disease management programs in heart failure .
BACKGROUND : Heart failure disease management programs can influence medical resource use and quality-adjusted survival .
Because projecting long-term costs and survival is challenging , a consistent and valid approach to extrapolating short-term outcomes would be valuable .
METHODS : We developed the Tools for Economic Analysis of Patient Management Interventions in Heart Failure Cost-Effectiveness Model , a Web-based simulation tool designed to integrate data on demographic , clinical , and laboratory characteristics ; use of evidence-based medications ; and costs to generate predicted outcomes .
Survival projections are based on a modified Seattle Heart Failure Model .
Projections of resource use and quality of life are modeled using relationships with time-varying Seattle Heart Failure Model scores .
The model can be used to evaluate parallel-group and single-cohort study designs and hypothetical programs .
Simulations consist of 10,000 pairs of virtual cohorts used to generate estimates of resource use , costs , survival , and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios from user inputs .
RESULTS : The model demonstrated acceptable internal and external validity in replicating resource use , costs , and survival estimates from 3 clinical trials .
Simulations to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of heart failure disease management programs across 3 scenarios demonstrate how the model can be used to design a program in which short-term improvements in functioning and use of evidence-based treatments are sufficient to demonstrate good long-term value to the health care system .
CONCLUSION : The Tools for Economic Analysis of Patient Management Interventions in Heart Failure Cost-Effectiveness Model provides researchers and providers with a tool for conducting long-term cost-effectiveness analyses of disease management programs in heart failure .
Heart Failure : Pathophysiology , Diagnosis , Medical Treatment Guidelines , and Nursing Management .
Heart failure ( HF ) is a debilitating chronic disease and is expected to increase in upcoming years due to demographic changes .
Nurses in all settings have an essential role in supporting patients in managing this disease .
This article describes the pathophysiology of HF , diagnosis , medical management , and nursing interventions .
It is crucial for nurses to understand the pathophysiology of HF and the importance that nursing actions have on enhancing medical management to alleviate symptoms and to deter the advancement of the pathophysiologic state .
Such an understanding can ultimately reduce morbidity and mortality and optimize quality of life in patients with HF .
