3.4 BLADE-ELEMENT THEORY The momentum theories, which have been developed in the previous sections, are based on a consideration of the mean axial and rotational velocity in the slipstream and determine the thrust and torque of a blade from the rate of decrease of momentum of the fluid.
The theories determine an upper limit to the power coefficient of any blade, depending on the free-stream wind velocity and on the power extracted, but they restrict the understanding of the effect of rotor geometry (i.e.
blade airfoil section, chord and twist).
The blade-element theory is an alternative method of analyzing the behavior of blades due to their motion through air.
As shown in Figure 3.7, for this analysis, it is assumed that the blade is divided into N sections (or elements) and the aerodynamic force acting on each blade element can be estimated as the force on suitable airfoil characteristics of the same cross-section adopted for the blade elements.
Finally assuming that the behavior of each element is not affected by the adjacent elements of the same  44  blade, the force on the whole blade can be derived by adding the contributions of all the elements along the blade.
Figure 3.7 Schematic of blade elements  A diagram showing the developed blade element at radius r and the velocities and forces acting on this element is given in Figure 3.8.
The relative wind velocity U rel is the vector sum of the wind velocity at the rotor U ∞ (1 − a ) (the vector sum of the free-stream wind velocity, U ∞ and the induced axial velocity −aU ∞ ) and the wind velocity due to rotation of the blade.
And this rotational component is the vector sum of the blade section velocity, Ω r and the induced angular velocity a′ Ω r .
Hence the relative wind velocity will be as shown on the velocity diagram in Figure 3.8.
The minus sign in the term U ∞ (1 − a) is due to the retardation of flow while the air approaching the rotor and the plus sign in the term Ωr (1 + a′ ) as shown in Figure 3.8 is due to the flow of air in the reverse direction of blade rotation after air particles hit the blades and so give torque.
In the mean time let the existence of the axial and angular induction factors assumed, their evaluation will be given in the subsequent section.
45  Figure 3.8 Blade Geometry for analysis of a HAWT  From Figure 3.8 the following relationships can be determined;  U rel =  U ∞ (1 − a ) sin(ϕ )  (3.3.1)  tan(ϕ ) =  U ∞ (1 − a ) (1 − a ) = Ω r (1 + a′) (1 + a′)λr 1 2 ρU rel cdr 2  (3.3.2)  dFD = CD  (3.3.3)  46  1 2 dFL = CL ρU rel cdr 2  (3.3.4)  dT = dFL cos ϕ + dFD sin ϕ  (3.3.5)  dL = dFL sin ϕ − dFD cos ϕ  (3.3.6)  If the rotor has B number of blades, the total normal and tangential force on the element at a distance r by rearranging equation 3.3.5 and 3.3.6 with the use of equation 3.3.1, 3.3.3 and 3.3.4;  1 2 dT = B ρU rel (CL cos ϕ + CD sin ϕ )cdr 2  (3.3.7)  1 2 dL = B ρU rel (CL sin ϕ − CD cos ϕ )cdr 2  (3.3.8)  The elemental torque due to the tangential forces, dL operating at a distance r from the center is given by;  dQ = rdL  (3.3.9)  hence the elemental torque by inserting equation 3.3.8 into equation 3.3.9;  1 2 dQ = B ρU rel (CL sin ϕ − CD cos ϕ )crdr 2  (3.3.10)  From the velocity diagram in Figure 3.8, relative wind velocity can be written as below;  47  U rel =  U ∞ (1 − a ) sin ϕ  (3.3.11)  and by defining solidity ratio, σ as following;  σ=  Bc 2π r  (3.3.12)  and inserting equations 3.3.11 and 3.3.12 into equations 3.3.7 and 3.3.10, the general form of elemental thrust and torque equations become; 2 U ∞ (1 − a) 2 dT = σπρ (CL cos ϕ − CD sin ϕ )rdr sin 2 ϕ  (3.3.13)  dQ = σπρ  2 U ∞ (1 − a ) 2 (CL sin ϕ − CD cos ϕ )r 2 dr 2 sin ϕ  (3.3.14)  Thus, from blade element theory, two equations (3.3.13 and 3.3.14) have been obtained.
They define the normal force (thrust) and the tangential force (torque) on an annular rotor section as a function of the flow angles at the blades and airfoil characteristics.
Here it is convenient to consider in turn the following assumptions which are the bases of developing blade element theory [11]:  • The assumption that the behavior of an element is not affected by the adjacent elements of the same blade  • The airfoil characteristics to be adopted for the element  48  The independence of blade elements, assumed in the blade element theory and also in all later developments of theory, is analogous to the assumption adopted in the general momentum theory that the thrust on an elementary annulus of a rotor may be expressed as dT = 2 ρ u (u − U ∞ )dA (equation 3.2.15).
In the discussion of general momentum theory it was pointed out that this equation could not be established rigorously.
Similarly, in the blade element theory, it is not possible to give a rigorous proof of the independence of the blade elements and the validity of the assumption must be justified by an appeal to suitable experimental results.
If the assumption valid, the thrust on the blade element at radial distance r with the blade angle θ should be independent of the variation of the blade angle along the remainder of the blade.
A check of the assumption can therefore be obtained by taking two propellers of different pitch with blades of the same plan form and section and by rotating the blades of one rotor so that the blade angles of the two rotors have the same value at a chosen radial distance r .
The thrust distribution along the blades should then show the same element of thrust on the blade elements under examination.
By means of a series of experiments [12] has been established the independence of the blade elements over the principal part of the blades.
The second assumption states that two-dimensional airfoil characteristics can be used for the blade elements.
Airfoil two-dimensional characteristics are usually determined from tests of a rectangular airfoil of different aspect ratio.
Hence the lift and drag characteristics are dependent on aspect ratio.
But in the fully-attached regime, airfoil section characteristics are not generally affected by aspect ratio, and since HAWT rotors operate in the fully-attached regime of the flow while extracting maximum energy from the wind, two-dimensional (i.e.
infinite aspect ratio) can be used in predicting performance.
However, when two-dimensional data are used, a tip-loss factor must be added as will be described in the next chapter.49  3.5 BLADE ELEMENT-MOMENTUM (BEM) THEORY In the general momentum theory attention was directed to the motion of the fluid and the forces acting on the blades were determined.
The defect of the general momentum theory was that it gave no indication of the shape of blade required to produce the reactions considered.
The principle of the blade element theory was to consider the forces experienced by the blades of the rotor in their motion through the air and this theory was therefore intimately concerned with the geometrical shape of the blade.
In order to bridge the gap between these two theories, the blade element momentum theory (BEM) which is also known as strip theory has been developed.
BEM theory relates rotor performance to rotor geometry and particularly important prediction of this theory is the effect of finite blade number.
The assumptions for BEM theory are obviously the combination of those which were made for general momentum and blade element theory.
The foremost assumption in BEM theory is that individual streamtubes (the intersection of a streamtube and the surface swept by the blades) can be analyzed independently of the rest of the flow as assumed before for the blade element theory.
A second assumption associated with the development of BEM theory is that  spanwise flow is negligible, and therefore airfoil data taken from two-dimensional section tests are acceptable as assumed before in again blade element theory.
A third assumption is that flow conditions do not vary in the circumferential direction, i.e.
axisymmetric flow.
With this assumption the streamtube to be analyzed is a uniform annular ring centered on the axis of revolution as assumed before in general momentum theory.
BEM theory refers to the determination of a wind turbine blade performance by combining the equations of general momentum theory and blade element  50  theory.
In this case by equating the elemental thrust force equations from general momentum theory and blade element theory (equations 3.2.15 and 3.3.13 respectively) the following relationship is obtained;  a cos ϕ = (σ CL ) [1 + (CD CL ) tan ϕ ] (1 − a ) 4sin 2 ϕ  (3.4.1)  and equating the elemental torque derived in both general momentum theory and blade element theory (equations 3.2.18 and 3.3.14 respectively);  a′ (σ CL ) = [1 − (CD CL )cot ϕ ] (1 − a ) 4λr sin ϕ  (3.4.2)  Equation 3.4.2 can be rearranged by using equation 3.3.2, which relates  a, a′ , ϕ and λr based on the geometric considerations;  a′ (σ CL ) = [1 − (CD CL )cot ϕ ] (1 + a′) 4cos ϕ  (3.4.3)  In the calculation of induction factors a and a′ , accepted practice is to set CD zero for the purpose of determining induction factors independently from airfoil characteristics.
For airfoils with low drag coefficient, this simplification introduces negligible errors [13].
So equation 3.4.1, 3.4.2 and 3.4.3 can be rewritten considering CD ≈ 0  a cos ϕ = (σ CL ) (1 − a ) 4sin 2 ϕ  (3.4.4)  51  a′ (σ CL ) = (1 − a ) 4λr sin ϕ a′ (σ CL ) = (1 + a′) 4cos ϕ  (3.4.5)  (3.4.6)  By using these three equations the following useful relationships result after some algebraic manipulation;  CL =  4sin ϕ (cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ ) σ (sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ )  (3.4.7)  a=  1 1 + [4sin ϕ (σ CL )cos ϕ ]   2  (3.4.8)  a′ =  1 [[4cosϕ (σ CL )] − 1]  (3.4.9)  a a′ = λr tan ϕ  (3.4.10)  To determine the power coefficient of a wind turbine, the power contribution from each annulus is found firstly, then integrated along the blade length and finally using the equation 2.5.1, power coefficient C p can be obtained.
The elemental power from each blade element was defined in equation 3.2.19 as;  dP = Ω dQ  (3.2.19)  52  And the total power from the rotor is;  P = ∫ dP = ∫ Ω dQ rh rh  R  R  (3.2.20)  Hence the power coefficient C p becomes by rewriting equation 2.5.1 here,  ∫ Ω dQ P rh Cp = = 3 3 1/ 2 ρU ∞ A 1/ 2 ρU ∞π R 2  R  (3.4.11)  Using the expression for the elemental torque from equation 3.3.14, the power coefficient can be expressed as below,  (1 − a ) 2 C p = 2 ∫ σ CL [1 − (CD CL )cot ϕ ] λr2d λr sin ϕ λ 2  (3.4.12)  Finally by using equations 3.4.4 and 3.4.10 in equation 3.4.12, the general form of power coefficient expression can be obtained as;  Cp =  8  λ  2  ∫ λ a′(1 − a)[1 − (C λ 3 r h  λ  D  CL )cot ϕ ] d λr  (3.4.13)  Note that when CD ≈ 0 , the equation above for C p is the same as the one derived from the general momentum theory (equation 3.2.22).
An alternative expression for the power coefficient can be derived after performing the tedious algebra and by inserting equations 3.4.7 and 3.4.8 into equation 3.4.12;  53  Cp =  ∫ λ 2 λ λr2 d λr h  8  λ  sin 2 ϕ ( cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ ) 1 − ( CD CL ) cot ϕ  ...   (3.4.14)  Note that even though the axial and angular induction factors were determined assuming the CD = 0 , the drag is included in the power coefficient calculation.
By the same token, the thrust coefficient CT can be found beginning from the definition of thrust coefficient in the equation 2.5.3 as following;  CT =  ∫ λ 2 λ λr d λr h  4  λ  sin 2ϕ ( cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ ) 1 + ( CD CL ) tan ϕ  ...   (3.4.15)  3.6 VORTEX THEORY In addition to BEM theory which will be used for rotor performance analysis and blade design of HAWT in this thesis; vortex theory is an alternative theory which provides a method of analyzing the rotor performance.
Even though vortex theory is not the scope of this thesis there is a necessity of discussing of this theory briefly without going into its detail.
Because the vortex theory explains the origin of axial and angular induction factors which have been already introduced in both general momentum theory and blade element theory without giving any physical meaning about their existence.
The vortex theory depends fundamentally on the conception that the lift of an airfoil section is associated with a circulation of the flow around its contour.
According to modern airfoil theory the lift L per unit length of an airfoil section in two-dimensional motion is related to the circulation Γ around its contour by the following equation;  54  L = ρU Γ  (3.5.1)  Applying this concept of airfoil theory to the problem of the rotor blades, it is evident that there must be circulation of the flow around the blades of the rotor in order to produce the aerodynamic force experienced by the blades.
In general the circulation Γ around the blade element will vary along the blade, but to explain the mode of action of the blades it is simpler to assume as a first step that the circulation is constant along the whole blade.
The existence of this circulation can be expressed also by the statement that there is a vortex line of strength Γ , bound to the blade and running along it from root to tip.
But a vortex line can not begin or end abruptly; unless it forms a closed curve in the body, it must be continued as a free vortex line in the fluid and in this latter form it follows the general motion of the fluid as a trailing vortex behind the body.
Thus the bound vortex must be continued by two free vortices in the fluid, one springing from the root of the blade and the other from its tip.
As shown in Figure 3.9 the free vortex springing from the roots of propeller blades will be straight line along the axis of the propeller and its strength will be BΓ for a propeller with B blades.
The tip vortices, each of strength Γ , will be of helical shape and will be tracing out the paths described by the tips of the propeller blades.
Figure 3.9 Tip and root vortices  55  Up to this point the vortex system of a rotor or propeller has been based for simplicity on the assumption that the circulation along the blade is constant.
More generally, however, the strength of the circulation will vary along the blade and indeed the condition of constant circulation along the whole blade is physically impossible.
Because the pressure difference between the top and bottom surface of the blade causes flow and pressure equalization near the blade tips.
For an illustration the actual variation of the circulation along the blade is given in Figure 3.10.
Due to the variation of the circulation along the blade, trailing vortices will arise, not only at the root and tip of the blade, but from every point of its trailing edge, forming a continual screwlike vortex sheet.
Figure 3.10 Variation of bound circulation along blade length  If δΓ is the increase of circulation between the points r and (r + δ r ) of the blade, then the strength of the helical vortex springing from this element will be −δΓ .
The vortex line springing from one blade form a vortex sheet in the form of  a screw surface and there will be one such surface for each blade.
The slipstream of the rotor consists of these vortex sheets and of the fluid contained between them.Referring to the Figure 3.5, let r be the radial distance of any annular element of the rotor plane, and let u and v be respectively the inflow (the flow immediately in front of the rotor plane) axial and radial components of the fluid velocity.
Let pu be the inflow pressure and let p' be the decrease of outflow (the flow immediately behind the rotor plane) pressure associated with an angular velocity w. In the final wake let pw be the pressure, uw be the axial velocity and ww be the angular velocity at a radial distance rw from the axis of the slipstream.
By applying the condition of continuity of flow for the annular element is;  uwrwdrw = urdr  (3.2.1)  And the condition for constancy of angular momentum of the fluid as it passes down the slipstream is; 2 ww rw = wr 2  (3.2.2)  Also since the element of torque of the radial blade element is equal to the angular momentum extracted in unit time to the corresponding annular element of the slipstream;  35  dQ = ρ uwr 2 dA Where dA = 2π rdr  (3.2.3)  For constructing the energy equation, Bernoulli's equation can be used separately from free-stream to inflow conditions and from outflow to wake conditions;  1 2 H o = po + ρU ∞ 2 1 = pu + ρ ( u 2 + v 2 ) 2 1 H1 = pd + ρ ( u 2 + v 2 + w2 r 2 ) 2 1 2 2 2 = pw + ρ ( uw + wwrw ) 2 Hence  1 H o − H1 = p′ − ρ ( w2 r 2 ) 2  (3.2.4)  Equation 3.2.4 shows that the decrease of total pressure head passing through the blade element is below the thrust per unit area p′ by a term representing the kinetic energy of the rotational motion imparted to the fluid by the torque of the blade.
The expressions for the total pressure head also give;  po − pw =  1 1 2 2 2 ρ ( uw − U ∞ ) + ρ wwrw2 + ( H 0 − H1 ) 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 = ρ ( uw − U ∞ ) + ρ ( ww rw − w2 r 2 ) + p′ 2 2  (3.2.5)  To find the pressure drop, p′ Bernoulli's equation can be applied between inflow and outflow relative to the blades which are rotating with an angular 36  velocity Ω .
Note that the flow behind the rotor rotates in the opposite direction to the rotor, in reaction to the torque exerted by the flow on the rotor.
Hence the angular velocity of the air relative to the blade increases from Ω to ( Ω + w ) , while the axial component of the velocity remains constant.
The result is;  p′ =  1  2 ρ ( Ω + w) − Ω 2  r 2  2  = ρ ( Ω + w / 2 ) wr 2  (3.2.6)  Finally, combining this result (equation 3.2.6) with the previous equations 3.2.2 and 3.2.5, the drop of pressure in the wake becomes;  po − pw =  1 2 2 2 ρ ( uw − U ∞ ) + ρ ( Ω + w / 2 ) wwrw 2  (3.2.7)  The pressure gradient in the wake balances the centrifugal force on the fluid and is governed by the following equation;  dpw 2 = ρ ww rw drw  (3.2.8)  And then differentiating equation 3.2.7 relative to rw and equating to equation 3.2.8, a differential equation is obtained connecting the axial and rotational velocities in the wake,  1 d d 2 2 U ∞ − uw  = ( ww + Ω ) ( wwrw2 )   2 drw drw  (3.2.9)  The equation of axial momentum for the blade element, which can be established rigorously by a simple extension of the analysis of the previous section,  T = ∫ ρ uw (U ∞ − uw ) dAw + ∫ ( po − pw ) dAw  37  and in the differential form;  dT = ρ uw (U ∞ − uw ) dAw + ( po − pw ) dAw  (3.2.10)  also from the pressure decrease at the rotor plane, dT can alternatively be written as;  dT = p′dA By inserting equation 3.2.6 into its place in equation 3.2.11,  (3.2.11)  dT = ρ ( Ω + w / 2 ) wr 2 dA Finally, combining equation 3.2.1, 3.2.5, 3.2.10 and 3.2.12,  (3.2.12)   Ω + ww / 2 Ω + w / 2  1 2 2 − [U ∞ − uw ] =   uw ww rw 2 uw U∞    (3.2.13)  It should be emphasized that the equation of axial momentum is based on the assumption that the axial force due to the pressure on the lateral boundary of the streamline is equal to the pressure force, ( po Ao − pw Aw ) over its ends.
This assumption implies that the mutual interference between various annular elements has been neglected but the actual deviations from the conditions represented by equation 3.2.12 are believed to be extremely small in general.
The other assumptions made for deriving the general momentum equations so far are that the rotor was treated as having very large number of very narrow blades (infinite number of blades) resulting in negligible radial component of the velocity of the fluid and the air is incompressible and inviscid, i.e., fluid drag is zero [10].
Equations 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.9 and 3.2.13, though rather complex in form, suffice to determine the relationship between the thrust and torque of the blade and the flow in the slipstream.
If, for example, the angular velocity ww is known as a  38  function of the radius r in the wake, equation 3.2.9 determines the axial velocity,  uw and then equation 3.2.13, taken in conjunction with equation 3.2.1 and equation 3.2, determines the axial and rotational velocities at the rotor plane.
The thrust and torque of the rotor are then obtained from equation 3.2.12 and equation 3.2.3 respectively.
Owing to the complexity of these equations, however, it is customary to adopt certain approximations based on the fact that the rotational velocity in the slipstream is generally very small.
An exact solution of the general momentum equations can be obtained when the flow in the slipstream is irrotational except along the axis.
This condition implies that the rotational momentum wr 2 has the same value for all radial elements.
Then by virtue of equation 3.2.11, the axial velocity, uw is constant along a radius because this equation's right-hand side is zero.
Defining the axial velocities u and uw as  u = U ∞ (1 − a ) uw = U ∞ (1 − b ) After some algebraic manipulations, it can be obtained from equation 3.2.13,  b (1 − a ) b 2  a = 1 − 2  2  4λ (b − a )   (3.2.14)  Examination of equation 3.2.14 shows that the axial velocity reduction of the rotor disk is always approximately one-half the reduction in the far-wake for the tip-speed ratio above 2, which is the same result reached in the previous section when the wake rotation was neglected.
For the approximate solution, the following assumption is made.
The angular velocity w imparted to the slipstream is very small compared with the angular velocity Ω of the blades and it is therefore possible to simplify the general  39  equations by neglecting certain terms involving w2 [10].
On this basis of approximation the pressure pw in the wake is equal to the initial pressure po of the air and the decrease of pressure p′ across the rotor disk is equal to the decrease of total pressure head ( H o − H1 ) .
The relationships connecting the thrust and axial velocity are then the same as in the simple momentum theory, the axial velocity u at the rotor disk is the arithmetic mean of the axial velocity U ∞ and the slipstream velocity uw , and the element of thrust is  dT = 2 ρ u (u − U ∞ )dA 2 = 4πρU ∞ a (1 − a )rdr  (3.2.15)  Alternatively, from equation 3.2.6,  dT = p′dA = 2πρ (Ω + w / 2) wr 3dr And defining angular induction factor, a′ = w / 2Ω  dT = 4πρΩ 2 a′(1 + a′)r 3dr  (3.2.16)  Equating the two expressions for the thrust given in equation 3.2.15 and equation 3.2.16, a relationship is obtained between axial induction factor, a and angular induction factor a′ ,  a (1 − a ) Ω 2 r 2 = = λr2 2 a′(1 + a′) U ∞ The element of torque is obtained from equation 3.2.3 as following;  (3.2.17)  40  dQ = ρ uwr 2 dA = 4πρU ∞ Ω a′(1 − a )r 3dr (3.2.18)  The power generated at each radial element, dP is given by the following equation;  dP = Ω dQ  (3.2.19)  By substituting dQ from equation 3.2.18 into equation 3.2.19 and using the definition of local tip speed ratio, λr the expression for the power generated at each radial element becomes;  dP =  1  3  8 ρ AU ∞  2 a′(1 − a)λr3d λr  2 λ   (3.2.20)  The incremental contribution to the power coefficient from each annular ring is given by;  dC p =  dP 3 1/ 2 ρU ∞ A  (3.2.21)  By inserting equation 3.2.20 into equation 3.2.21 and integrating elemental power coefficient from local tip speed ratio at the hub, λh to the tip speed ratio, C p is obtained as;  Cp =  8  λ  2  ∫ a′(1 − a)λ d λ λ 3 r h  λ  r  (3.2.22)  In order to integrate equation 3.2.22, it is needed to relate the variables  a, a′ and λr .
By solving equation 3.2.17, a′ in terms of a ,  41  1 1 4 1 + 2 a (1 − a ) a′ = − + λr 2 2  (3.2.23)  The aerodynamic conditions for the maximum possible power production occur when the term a′(1 − a ) in equation 3.2.22 is at its greatest value.
Substituting the value for a′ from equation 3.2.23 into the term a′(1 − a ) and setting the derivative with respect to a and equating to zero yields;  (1 − a )(4a − 1) 2 λ = (1 − 3a ) 2 r  (3.2.24)  And substituting equation 3.2.24 into equation 3.2.17, it is found that for maximum power in each annular ring,  a′ = (1 − 3a ) /(4a − 1)  (3.2.25)  If equation 3.2.24 is differentiated with respect to a , a relationship between d λr and da at those conditions is obtained;  2λr d λr = 6(4a − 1)(1 − 2a ) 2 /(1 − 3a ) 2  da    (3.2.26)  Now, substituting the equations 3.2.24, 3.2.25 and 3.2.26 into the equation 3.2.22 gives;  C p ,max Where  24 2  (1 − a )(1 − 2a )(1 − 4a )  = 2 ∫  da (1 − 3a ) λ a1    a  2  (3.2.27)  a1 : corresponding axial induction factor for λr = λh a2 : corresponding axial induction factor for λr = λ  Also from equation 3.2.24;  42  λ 2 = (1 − a2 )(1 − 4a2 ) /(1 − 3a2 )  (3.2.28)  Equation 3.2.28 can be solved for the values of a that correspond to operation at tip speed ratios of interest.
Note also from equation 3.2.28, a2 = 1/ 3 is the upper limit of the axial induction factor giving an infinitely large tip speed ratio.
Table 3.1 presents a summary of numerical values for C p ,max as a function of  λr with corresponding values for the axial induction factor at the tip, a2 Table 3.1 Power coefficient, C p ,max as a function of tip-speed ratio, λ and a2  λ 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0  a2 0.2983 0.3170 0.3245 0.3279 0.3297 0.3324 0.3329 0.3330  C p ,max 0.289 0.416 0.477 0.511 0.533 0.570 0.581 0.585  The result of general momentum theory are graphically represented in Figure 3.6 which also shows the Betz limit of an ideal turbine based on the linear momentum analysis performed in the previous section.
The result shows that the higher the tip-speed ratio, the greater the maximum power coefficient.
43  Figure 3.6 Theoretical maximum power coefficients as a function of tip-speed ratio for an ideal HAWT with and without wake rotationCHAPTER 3 AERODYNAMICS OF HAWTs 1.2 INTRODUCTION Wind turbine power production depends on the interaction between the rotor and the wind.
The wind may be considered to be a combination of the mean wind and turbulent fluctuations about that mean flow.
Experience has shown that the major aspects of wind turbine performance (mean power output and mean loads) are determined by the aerodynamic forces generated by the mean wind.
Periodic aerodynamic forces caused by wind shear, off-axis winds, rotor rotation, randomly fluctuating forces induced by turbulence and dynamic effects are the source of fatigue loads and are a factor in the peak loads experience by a wind turbine.
These are, of course, important, but can only be understood once the aerodynamics of steady state operation has been understood.
Accordingly this chapter focuses primarily on steady state aerodynamics.
The chapter starts with the analysis of an idealized wind turbine rotor.
The discussion introduces important concepts and illustrates the general behavior of wind turbine rotors and the airflow around wind turbine rotors.
The analysis is also used to determine theoretical performance limits for wind turbines.
General aerodynamic concepts are then introduced.
The details of momentum theory and blade-element theory are developed.
The combination of two theories, called strip theory or blade-element momentum theory (BEM) is then studied to outline the governing equations for the aerodynamic design and power prediction of a wind turbine rotor which will be used in the next chapter.
The last section of this chapter discusses the vortex theory.
Vortex theory is another approach for aerodynamic design of wind turbine rotors, but here only its  26  concepts related to the former two theories are explained in order to make some definitions in these theories more understandable.
1.2 THE ACTUATOR DISK THEORY AND THE BETZ LIMIT A simple model, generally attributed to Betz (1926) can be used to determine the power from an ideal turbine rotor, the thrust of the wind on the ideal rotor and the effect of the rotor operation on the local wind field.
The simplest aerodynamic model of a HAWT is known as 'actuator disk model' in which the rotor becomes a homogenous disk that removes energy from the wind.
Actuator disk theory is based on a linear momentum theory developed over 100 years ago to predict the performance of ship propeller.
The theory of the ideal actuator disk is based on the following assumptions[9]:  • Homogenous, Incompressible, steady state fluid flow • No frictional drag • The pressure increment or thrust per unit area is constant over the disk • The rotational component of the velocity in the slipstream is zero.
Thus the actuator disk is an ideal mechanism which imparts momentum to the fluid in the axial direction only  • There is continuity of velocity through the disk • An infinite number of blades A complete physical representation of this actuator disk may be obtained by considering a close pair of tandem propellers or turbine blades rotating in opposite direction and so designed that the element of torque at any radial distance from the axis has the same value for each blade in order that there shall be no rotational motion in the slipstream; also each turbine actual blade must be replaced with its small number of blades by another of the same diameter having a very large 27  number of very narrow equal frictionless blades, the solidity at any radius being the same as for the actual turbine and finally to have the blade angles suitably chosen to give a uniform distribution of thrust over the whole disk.
The analysis of the actuator disk theory assumes a control volume, in which the control volume boundaries are the surface of a stream tube and two crosssections of the stream tube as shown in Figure 3.1.  actuator disk p0  p0  pu  pd  U∞ Streamtube boundary 1  U2 U3  Uw wake  2  3  4  Figure 3.1 Idealized flow through a wind turbine represented by a non-rotating, actuator disk  The only flow is across the ends of the streamtube.
The turbine is represented by a uniform "actuator disk" which creates a discontinuity of pressure in the streamtube of air flowing through it.
Note also that this analysis is not limited to any particular type of wind turbine.
From the assumption that the continuity of velocity through the disk exists;  U 2 = U3 = U R For steady state flow, air mass flow rate through the disk can be written as;  28  m = ρ AU R  i  (3.1.1)  Applying the conservation of linear momentum to the control volume enclosing the whole system, the net force can be found on the contents of the control volume.
That force is equal and opposite to the thrust, T which is the force of the wind on the wind turbine.
Hence from the conservation of linear momentum for a one-dimensional, incompressible, time-invariant flow the thrust is equal and opposite to the change in momentum of air stream;  T = m (U ∞ − U w )  i  (3.1.2)  No work is done on either side of the turbine rotor.
Thus the Bernoulli function can be used in the two control volumes on either side of the actuator disk.
Between the free-stream and upwind side of the rotor (from section 1 to 2 in Figure 3.1) and between the downwind side of the rotor and far wake (from section 3 to 4 in Figure 3.1) respectively;  1 1 2 2 p0 + ρU ∞ = pu + ρU R 2 2 1 1 2 2 pd + ρU R = p0 + ρU w 2 2  (3.1.3) (3.1.4)  The thrust can also be expressed as the net sum forces on each side of the actuator disk;  T = Ap′ Where  (3.1.5)  p′ = ( pu − pd )  ( 3.1.6)  By using equations 3.1.3 and 3.1.4, the pressure decrease, p′ can be found as;  29  p′ =  1 2 2 ρ (U ∞ − U w ) 2  (3.1.7)  And by substituting equation 3.1.7 into equation 3.1.5;  T=  1 2 2 ρ A (U ∞ − U w ) 2 i  (3.1.8)  By equating the thrust values from equation 3.1.2 in which substituting equation 3.1.1 in place of m and equation 3.1.8, the velocity at the rotor plane can be found as;  UR =  U∞ + Uw 2  (3.1.9)  Thus, the wind velocity at the rotor plane, using this simple model, is the average of the upstream and downstream wind speeds.
If an axial induction factor (or the retardation factor), a is defined as the fractional decrease in the wind velocity between the free stream and the rotor plane, then  a=  U R = U ∞ (1 − a ) U w = U ∞ (1 − 2a )  U∞ − U R U∞  (3.1.10) (3.1.11) (3.1.12)  The velocity and pressure distribution are illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Because of continuity, the diameter of flow field must increase as its velocity decreases and note that there occurs sudden pressure drop at rotor plane which contributes the torque rotating turbine blades.
30  Figure 3.2 Velocity and pressure distribution along streamtube  The power output, P is equal to the thrust times the velocity at the rotor plane;  P = TU R Using equation 3.1.8,  P=  1 2 2 ρ A (U ∞ − U w )U R 2  And substituting for U R and U w from equations 3.1.11 and 3.1.12, 3 P = 2 ρ Aa (1 − a ) U ∞ 2  (3.1.12)  Using equation 2.5.1, the power coefficient C p becomes;  31  C p = 4a (1 − a )  2  (3.1.13)  The maximum C p is determined by taking the derivative of equation 3.1.13 with respect to a and setting it equal to zero yields;  (C p ) max = 16 / 27 = 0.5926 When a = 1/ 3 This result indicates that if an ideal rotor were designed and operated such that the wind speed at the rotor were 2/3 of the free stream wind speed, then it would be operating at the point of maximum power production.
This is known as the Betz limit.
From equations 3.1.8, 3.1.11 and 3.1.12 the axial thrust on the disk can be written in the following form; 2 T = 2 ρ Aa (1 − a ) )U ∞  (3.1.14)  Similarly to the power coefficient, thrust coefficient can be found as by use of equation 2.5.3;  CT = 4a(1 − a)  (3.1.15)  Note that CT has a maximum of 1.0 when a = 0.5 and the downstream velocity is zero.
At maximum power output (a = 1/ 3) , CT has a value of 8/9.
A graph of the  power and thrust coefficients for an ideal Betz turbine is illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Note that, as it can be seen in Figure 3.3, this idealized model is not valid for an axial induction factors greater than 0.5.
32  Figure 3.3 Operating parameters for a Betz turbine  In conclusion, the actuator disk theory provides a rational basis for illustrating that the flow velocity at the rotor is different from the free-stream velocity.
The Betz limit C p ,max = 0.593 shows the maximum theoretically possible rotor power coefficient that can be attained from a wind turbine.
In practice three effects lead to a decrease in the maximum achievable power coefficient;  • Rotation of wake behind the rotor • Finite number of blades and associated tip losses • Non-zero aerodynamic drag  3.3 THE GENERAL MOMENTUM THEORY The axial momentum theory of the previous section was developed on the assumption that there was no rotational motion in the slipstream and that the  33  turbine blades could be replaced by an actuator disk which produced a sudden decrease of pressure in the fluid without any change of velocity.
More generally, the slipstream will have a rotational motion by the reaction of the torque of the blade and this rotational motion implies a further loss of energy.
To extend the theory to include the effects of this rotational motion, it is necessary to modify the qualities of the actuator disk by assuming that it can also impart a rotational component to the fluid velocity while the axial and radial components remain unchanged.
Using a streamtube analysis, equations can be written that express the relation between the wake velocities (both axial and rotational) and the corresponding wind velocities at the rotor disk.
In Figure 3.4 an annular streamtube model of this flow illustrating the rotation of the wake is shown for making the visualization clear.
And Figure 3.5 illustrates the geometry of this streamtube model of wind flow through a HAWT.
Rotor plane  Figure 3.4 Streamtube model of flow behind rotating wind turbine blade  34  Rotor plane  v p0  vw u uw rw pw  v  U∞ free-stream  r u pu pd  w  dr  streamlines  wake  Figure 3.5 Geometry of the streamtube model of flow through a HAWT rotor      56  The disturbance of the flow caused by a rotor can be represented as the induced velocity of the completed vortex system, comprising the bound vortices of the propeller blades and the free vortex sheets of the slipstream and the motion of the fluid relative to the propeller is the resultant of the axial velocity and its induced velocity.
Owing to the difficulty of calculating the induced velocity of the system of helical vortex sheets which constitute the slipstream of a rotor, the induced velocity is usually calculated on the assumption that the propeller has a very large number of blades.
This assumption implies that the vorticity of the slipstream is distributed throughout the whole of the fluid instead of being concentrated on a few vortex sheets and the vorticity can then be assumed to be grouped in the following manner.
Considering first the condition of constant circulation along the blades, the boundary of the slipstream is a cylindrical vortex sheet as shown in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11 Helical vortices replaced by axial and circumferential vortex lines  In place of the helical vortex lines covering the surface, the vorticity of the sheet may be considered a close succession of vortex rings RR whose vorticity represents the decreased axial velocity of the slipstream and a surface of vortex  57  lines LL whose vorticity represents the rotation of the slipstream.
The vortex system is completed by the axial vortex AA.
More generally, with circulation varying along the blades of the propeller, the whole slipstream must be considered as full of vortex systems of this simpler type.
The induced velocity of the vortex system in the ultimate wake far behind the rotor plane will be an axial velocity (U ∞ − uw ) and an angular velocity ww , which will be function of the radial coordinate rw .
In this wake the induced velocity of the bound vortices of the blades is negligibly small.
At the disc also the bound vortices can not give any component to the axial velocity owing to the symmetrical distribution of this vorticity relative to any arbitrary point of the disc and hence the axial induced velocity (u − U ∞ ) will be due wholly to the trailing vortex system.
Also if the expansion of the slipstream can be ignored in calculating these induced velocities, it can easily be seen that the axial induced velocity at the rotor disk is half that in the ultimate wake; for the vortex system is then simply a long cylinder extending indefinitely in one direction from the rotor disk and the induced axial velocity at a point of the wake, where the cylinder extends indefinitely in both directions, must clearly be double that at the corresponding point of the rotor disk.
Thus  1 (U ∞ − u ) = (U ∞ − uw ) 2 Or  1 u = (U ∞ + uw ) 2  (3.1.8)  which is the well known equation of the momentum theory described in section 3.1 from which the axial induction factor has been defined.
58  The induced angular velocity w immediately behind the rotor disk can be related to the corresponding angular velocity ww in the wake by considering the constancy of circulation of the fluid.
The ring of fluid of radius r immediately behind the rotor disk has the circulation 2π wr 2 and by the laws of hydrodynamics this circulation must remain constant as the ring of fluid passes down stream.
In the wake the radius of the ring has expanded to rw and there must therefore be a decrease of the angular velocity governed by the equation as described in section 3.2; 2 wr 2 = ww rw  (3.2.2)  Immediately in front of the rotor disk there can be no such circulation, since the fluid approaching the rotor is in irrotational motion.
Also the bound vorticitiy of the rotor blades must cause equal and opposite induced angular velocities ± w′ immediately before and behind the rotor disk and hence the induced angular velocity of the trailing vortex system must have the value w′ at the rotor disk in order to cancel the effect of the bound vortices in front of the disk.
It follows that the total induced angular velocity immediately behind the rotor disk is 2 w′ and this is the angular velocity previously denoted by w .
Hence the induced angular velocity of the trailing vortices at the propeller disk is  1 w and the angular 2  induction factor in section 3.2 has been defined by taking this value as a basis.
Vortex theory shows also the independence of blade elements which has been assumed in blade element theory in section 3.3 and tried to explained physically.
Here it will be explained with the help of vortex theory as well by taking the consideration of the system of trailing vortices which leads to the conclusion that induced flow experienced by the blade elements at radial distance r from the axis depends solely on the forces experienced by these elements and is not influenced by the blade elements at greater or less radial distance.
Consider the action of the  59  blade elements dr at radial distance r when the remainder of each rotor blade is inoperative.
The trailing vortices which spring from the ends of the element lie on the surfaces of two circular cylinders of radius r and r + dr respectively and the  vorticity may be resolved into two components as described before; one having its axis parallel to the rotor axis and the other being circumferential and similar to a succession of vortex rings.
The first component of the vorticity acts as the roller bearings between the rotating shell of air bounded by the cylindrical surfaces and the general mass of air.
Now the general mass of air can not acquire any circulation about the axis and hence the rotation due to the torque of the blade elements is confined to the region between the two cylindrical surfaces.
Hence also the rotational interference due to the vortex system is experienced by those blade elements which gave rise to the vorticity.
A similar argument can be applied to the second component of the vorticity and thus the independence of the blade elements at different radial distances from the axis of the rotor is established [14].
It may be summarized the results of the vortex theory as follows:  • The induced flow at any radius r depends only on the thrust and torque grading at this radius.
In other words, the blade elements at differing radii are hydrodynamically independent.
This proves the validity of the assumption about this result mentioned in blade element theory in section 3.3  • The induced axial velocity at a blade element is just half the axial velocity in the distant part of the slipstream which comes from the element at that radius.
This is in agreement with the findings of the actuator disk theory of section 3.1  • The induced circumferential or rotational velocity of inflow at a blade element is just the half the rotational velocity in the distant part of the slipstream which comes from the elements at that radius which is what was done while defining angular induction factor in the general momentum theory in section 3.2.
60  Before closing this section a few words about the advantages and disadvantages of the vortex theory over the BEM theory are the following; the BEM theory offers the method of ease of understanding and use as well as minimal computation requirements.
However there are a number of situations where it is not reasonable to expect BEM methods over the vortex methods since vortex methods offer the greatest accuracy.
Though methods are available for incorporating some complex effects such as yawed flow and unsteady aerodynamics into a BEM analysis, it is much more desirable to seek analytical methods of vortex theory which are fundamentally better suited to complex flows.
The greatest obstacle to widespread use of vortex methods is the computation burden.
No programs are currently available that calculate the details of an unsteady, three-dimensional, free wake in a reasonable time, regardless of computer platform [7].
61  CHAPTER 4 HAWT BLADE DESIGN 1.2 INTRODUCTION In this chapter, the application of BEM theory on the HAWT blade design and analyzing the aerodynamic performance of a rotor will be explained.
BEM theory, as previously developed, does not account the effect of blade numbers of a rotor.
In other words, the equations of BEM theory were derived assuming infinite number of blades of a rotor.
This chapter begins with introducing the concept of tip-loss factor and the generally recommended expression for including tip losses in HAWT blade design is given.
The governing equations developed in BEM theory will then be modified in order to take the tip losses into account.
In the next section flow states in which HAWTs are operating will be examined.
At which values of axial induction factor the application of BEM theory becomes invalid will be explained and the Glauert empirical relationship will then be given in order to proceed the blade design for those values of axial induction factor.
Since the HAWT blades are made from airfoils to transform the kinetic energy in the wind into useful energy, subsequent section is left to the introduction of airfoil selection criteria in HAWT blade design.
Most used airfoil families are described as well.
After giving all these necessary knowledge for a blade design, the blade design procedure for an optimum rotor and power performance prediction procedure for the modified blade shape are given.
The output of the BLADESIGN program performed for the airfoil NACA 4412 are also put in this section as an example.
62  The chapter is ended with the results and explanatory figures showing the effect of some parameters relating to the blade design.
It should be noted here that various methods [15,16,17,18,19] for HAWT blade design and predicting performance of a rotor have been studied and the important concepts [20,21] for design procedure have been used while developing the user-interface computer program, BLADESIGN.
1.2 THE TIP-LOSS FACTOR There was an assumption; the rotor has an infinite number of blades which was used in all theories discussed in the previous chapter.
With the aid of this assumption radial velocity of the flow across the rotor plane and in the wake has been always neglected and by so the derivations of governing equations have been established.
But near the boundary of the slipstream the air tends to flow around the edges of the blade tips and acquires an important radial velocity.
Because the pressure on the suction side of a blade is lower than on the pressure side which causes the air to flow around the tip from the lower to upper surface, reducing lift and hence power production near the tip.
A number of methods have been suggested for including the effect of tip losses.
An approximate method of estimating the effect of this radial flow and hence including the effect of tip losses has been given by L.Prandtl.
Prandtl tip loss model is generally recommended for the following reasons;  • Prandtl model prediction are in qualitative agreement with the behavior of HAWT rotors,  • Calculations of rotor power and thrust made with Prandtl model are in good agreement with test data,  • BEM theory calculations made with Prandtl model show good agreement with calculations made with vortex theory,  63  • The Prandtl model is easier to program and use The expression obtained by Prandtl for tip-loss factor is given by the following equation [22];    − ( B / 2 ) 1 − ( r R )       F = ( 2 π ) cos −1 exp   ( r R ) sin ϕ         (4.2.1)  The application of this equation for the losses at the blade tips is to provide an approximate correction to the system of equations summarized in section 3.4.2 for predicting rotor performance and blade design.
The physical fact represented by the tip correction is virtually that the maximum decrease of axial velocity (U ∞ − uw ) or 2aU ∞ in the slipstream occurs only on the vortex sheets and that the average decrease of axial velocity in the slipstream is only a fraction F of this velocity.
Thus, to order of approximation of the analysis the correct form of the axial momentum equation (equation 3.2.15) will be taken to be [2]; 2 dT = 4 FπρU ∞ a(1 − a)rdr  (4.2.2)  Similarly, also the angular momentum equation (equation 3.2.18) will be assumed to be [2];  dQ = 4 FπρU ∞ Ω a′(1 − a )r 3dr  (4.2.3)  Thus the effect of the tip-loss is to reduce slightly the thrust and torque contributed by the elements near the tips of the blades.
Equations derived in section 3.3 are all based on the definition of the forces used in blade element theory and remain unchanged.
When the forces from the  64  general momentum theory are set equal using the method of BEM theory as performed before, the derivation of the flow condition is changed.
Carrying the tip-loss factor through the calculations, the changes (through equations 3.4.4 to 3.4.9 and 3.4.14) will be as following;  a cos ϕ = (σ CL ) (1 − a) 4 F sin 2 ϕ a′ (σ CL ) = (1 − a) 4λr F sin ϕ a′ (σ CL ) = (1 + a′) 4 F cos ϕ 4 F sin ϕ (cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ ) σ (sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ ) 1  1 + [4 F sin ϕ (σ CL )cos ϕ ]  2  (4.2.4)  (4.2.5)  (4.2.6)  CL =  (4.2.7)  a=  (4.2.8)  a′ =  1 [[4 F cosϕ (σ Cl )] − 1]  (4.2.9)  Cp =  ∫ λ 2 λ λr2 d λr h  8  λ  F sin 2 ϕ ( cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ ) 1 − ( CD CL ) cot ϕ  ...   (4.2.10)  65  Even though the tip-loss factor has been accounted for the development of the computer program of the blade design and power performance prediction in this thesis, for the purpose of simplifying the calculations without including the tip-loss factor, an effective-radius of the rotor may be defined for the diminished thrust and torque output of the tip regions.
This effective radius is generally taken as about 3% smaller than the tip radius.
Note that from equation 4.2.1 it can be seen that F is always between 0 and 1 and in this empirical approach the following definition can be set;  F =1 F =0  if if  0 < r < re re ≤ r ≤ R  re ≈ 0.97 R 4.3 HAWT FLOW STATES Measured wind turbine performance closely approximates the results of BEM theory at low values of the axial induction factors but general momentum theory is no longer valid at axial induction factors greater that 0.5, because according to the equation 3.1.10, the wind velocity in the far wake would be negative.
In practice, as the axial induction factor increases above 0.5, the flow patterns through the wind turbine become much more complex than those predicted by the general momentum theory.
The thrust coefficient represented by the equation 3.1.14 can be used to characterize the different flow states of a rotor.
Figure 4.1 shows flow states and thrust force vectors T associated with a wide range of axial induction factors.
According to this figure, for negative induction factors ( a < 0 ) it is simple to continue the analysis to show that the device will act as a propulsor producing an upwind force (i.e.
CT < 0 ) that adds energy to the wake.
This is typical of the propeller state.
The operating states relevant to HAWTs are designated by the windmill state and the turbulent wake state.
The windmill state is the normal  66  operating state.
The windmill state is characterized by the flow conditions described by general momentum theory for axial induction factors less than about 0.5.
As illustrated by the data in Figure 4.1 obtained on wind turbines, above a =0.5,  rotor thrust increases up to 2 with increasing induction factor in the  turbulent wake state, instead of decreasing as predicted by the equation 3.1.14.
While general momentum theory no longer describes the turbine behavior, Glauert's empirical formula for axial induction factor from 0.4 to 1.0 are often used in HAWT rotor design for predicting wind turbine flow states.
C =4a(1−a) T  Windmill state  Turbulent Wake state  Figure 4.1 Relationship between the axial induction factor, flow state and thrust of a rotor[1]  67  When the induction somewhat over unity, the flow regime is called the vortex ring state and when a >2.0 the rotor reverses the direction of flow which is termed propeller brake state with power being added to flow to create downwind thrust on the rotor.
In the turbulent wake state, as stated before, a solution can be found by using the Glauert empirical relationship between the axial induction factor, a and the thrust coefficient, CT in conjunction with the blade element theory.
The empirical relationship developed by Glauert, including tip losses is [2];  a = (1 F ) 0.143 + 0.0203 − 0.6427 ( 0.889 − CT )    This equation is valid for a > 0.4 or equivalently for CT > 0.96  (4.3.1)  The Glauert empirical relationship was determined for the overall thrust coefficient for a rotor.
It is customary, however, to assume that it applies equally to equivalently local thrust coefficients for each blade section.
The local thrust coefficient CTr can be defined for each annular rotor section as;  CTr =  dT 2 1/ 2 ρU ∞ 2π rdr  (4.3.2)  From the equation 3.3.13 for the elemental thrust force from blade element theory, the local thrust coefficient becomes;  CTr = σ (1 − a ) ( CL cos ϕ + CD sin ϕ ) sin 2 ϕ 2  (4.3.3)  In order to include the blade design and power performance prediction of highly loaded HAWTs which are operating at high tip-speed ratios, the Glauert empirical formula is used in the developing of the computer program.
It firstly  68  calculates the local thrust coefficient for each blade section according to the equation 4.3.3 and if CTr < 0.96 then uses the previously derived equations for the  blade design.
If CTr > 0.96 then it estimates axial induction factor using equation 4.3.1 and this new value of axial induction factor is used in the equations for the design.
4.4 AIRFOIL SELECTION IN HAWT BLADE DESIGN HAWT blades use airfoils to develop mechanical power.
The cross-sections of HAWT blades have the shape of airfoils.
The width and length of the blade are functions of the desired aerodynamic performance, the maximum desired rotor power, the assumed airfoil parameters and strength calculations.
Hence designing HAWT blade depends on knowledge of the properties of airfoils.
The most significant flow factor influencing the behavior of airfoils is that of viscosity which is characterized by the Reynolds number of the airfoil/fluid combination.
The Reynolds number Re is defined by:  Re =  U rel c  υ  (4.4.1)  Airfoils in use on modern wind turbines range in representative chord size from about 0.3 m on a small-scale turbine over 2 m on a megawatt-scale rotor.
Tip speeds typically range from approximately 45 to 90 m/s.
Then for HAWT airfoils Reynolds number range from about 0.5 million to 10 million.
This implies that turbine airfoils generally operate beyond sensitive.
It should be noted that there are significant differences in airfoil behavior at different Reynolds numbers.
For that reason it must be made sure that appropriate Reynolds number data are available for the blade design.
69  The lift and drag characteristics of airfoils show also significant aspect-ratio dependence at angles of attack larger than 30 deg.
But in the fully-attached region in which HAWT is operating under windmill state are not greatly affected by aspect-ratio, so that two-dimensional (i.e.
infinite aspect-ratio) data can be used in blade design at low angles of attack.
However, when two-dimensional data are used, tip-loss factor must be added as described in equation 4.2.1.
In this thesis what has been considered in constructing the airfoil database from the computer program XFOIL which will be mentioned in the next chapter includes these considerations; two-dimensional data with Reynolds number in the order of 1 million.
There are evidently many engineering requirements into the selection of a wind turbine airfoil.
These include primary requirements related to aerodynamic performance, maintainability.
The usual assumption is that high lift and low drag are desirable for an airfoil and that the drag-to-lift ratio γ which is known as glide ratio as given below is a critical consideration [23]; structural, strength and stiffness, manufacturability and  γ = CD / CL  (4.4.2)  Airfoils for HAWTs are often designed to be used at low angles of attack, where lift coefficients are fairly high and drag coefficients are fairly low(i.e.
fairly low glide ratio).
Many different standard airfoils developed for aircraft have been used on HAWTs.
The NACA 230XX series and NACA44XX series airfoils have been used on many modern HAWT units.
The NACA 63-2XX series airfoils have demonstrated the best overall performance characteristics of the NACA airfoil families.
70  The experienced gained from these traditional airfoils has highlighted the shortcomings of such airfoils for HAWT application.
Consequently, a new airfoil family has been developed.
The name SERI designates the classification of these airfoils of this family which is now being used on commercial HAWTs.
In this thesis, SERI S809 airfoil characteristics has also been obtained and included in the airfoil database of the BLADESIGN program as an example apart from the NACA44XX, NACA 230XX and NACA 63-2XX series.
4.6 MODIFICATION OF BLADE GEOMETRY In general a rotor is not of the optimum shape because of highly loaded of the designed blade which can be produced from this optimum shape.
Furthermore, when a designed blade is run at a different tip-speed ratio other than the one for which it is designed, it is no longer optimum.
Thus, blade shape is generally redesigned for he purpose of decreasing the thrust force and torque acting on the blade during its operation by trying to keep the design power coefficient close to the one which is obtained for the designed blade.
In the previous section the method of obtaining optimum blade shape has been introduced and the variation of designed blade geometry parameters (chordlength and twist) for the airfoil NACA 4412 has been illustrated with figures as an example.
In this section by using the designed blade geometry as a guide, modification of blade geometry that promises to be a good approximation will be explained and to illustrate, the modified blade shape will be compared with the designed one for the airfoil NACA 4412.
4.6.1 MODIFICATION OF CHORD-LENGTH DISTRIBUTION:  The chord-length variation of a designed blade shape is not linear and near the root the blade chord-length is increasing steeply as it is shown in Figure 4.5.
Here such type of designed blade shape will be modified such that its shape becomes linear tapered.
While transforming the designed blade shape to a linear taper shape, the area of the designed blade shape is used as necessary information, in other words the chord-length of each blade element for the both shape should remain the same.
At least the one of linear taper shapes whose blade elements' chord-lengths are the closest to the designed blade elements' chord-lengths should be selected.
Also it should be kept in mind that most power is generated by the outer part of the blade (between r / R = 0.5 and r / R = 0.9 ) [24].
For this reason a blade linearized through these points of the ideal blade shape seems to be a good choice.
80  Generally, an iterative approach is used.
That is, a blade shape can be assumed and predicted its performance and another blade shape is assumed and the prediction of performance is repeated until a suitable blade shape has been chosen.
In Figure 4.8 the trapezoidal transformation of the designed blade shape for the NACA 4412 is shown.
Figure 4.8 Modified blade chord-length variations along the non-dimensional blade radius  4.6.2 MODIFICATION OF TWIST DISTRIBUTION: When the twist  distribution of a designed blade shape is analyzed from the Figure 4.6, it can be seen that a designed blade has to be twisted strongly, especially near the root again as it occurs in the chord-length variation of the same blade.
For that reason twist distribution can also be modified considering the ease of fabrication.
In this thesis, this modification has been performed such that twist distribution of the designed blade has been linearized by using the least-square method [25].
Also at some distance from blade root the twist becomes negative which generally causes the blade elements from this distance to blade tip to be stalled.
To prevent these blade  81  elements from being in stall region, their twist values are set to zero as shown in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9 Modified twist distribution along the non-dimensional blade radius  4.7 POWER PREDICTION OF MODIFIED BLADE SHAPE Now that the known parameters are chord-length and twist distribution along the blade length, the analysis is just reverse of the one which was done for designing optimum blade shape in section 4.5.
In the previous case design angle of attack, design lift coefficient and glide ratio corresponding to design lift coefficient were chosen and by so the parameters of blade geometry was found for an optimum rotor.
In this case lift coefficient and angle of attack have to be determined from the known blade geometry parameters.
This requires an iterative solution in which for each blade element the axial and angular induction factors are firstly taken as the values which were found for the corresponding designed blade elements and then determined within an acceptable tolerance of the previous guesses of induction factors during iteration.
The computer program written for this iteration procedure calculates the induction factors according to the flow chart given in Figure 4.10.
82  ϕ , F , a and a′ from the designed blade element Eqns: 4.5.4, 4.5.5, 4.2.8, 4.2.9 respectively  Take initial values of  Determine angle of attack, α Eqn: 4.5.7  Find CL and CD for the determined α using 2-D data of CL vs α and CD vs α for the selected airfoil  Calculate local thrust coefficient, CTr Eqn: 4.3.3  When CTr < 0.96  When CTr > 0.96  Update a Eqn: 4.2.8  Update a′ Eqn: 4.2.9  Update a Eqn: 4.3.1  Calculate the differences between updated a, a′ and previous guesses  If differences > 0.01  If differences < 0.01  Continue iteration by replacing initial values with updated ones  Take updated a and a′ as actual values for considered blade element  Figure 4.10 Flow chart of the iteration procedure for determining power coefficient of modified blade  83  4.8 RESULTS In this chapter, design of a HAWT blade has been explained and shown the solution method via the equations derived from BEM theory.
Tip-loss factor and drag effect have also been considered in these equations.
The method of determining blade shape for optimum performance of a turbine has been developed, how an optimum blade shape is modified for the best performance has been introduced and finally power performance calculation methods for both have been established.
And the airfoil NACA 4412 was used while performing these methods and illustrated with figures as an example.
In addition to these studies, the effect of some parameters relating to the blade design have also been investigated for the purpose of keeping in mind what should be considered while designing a blade shape for the best performance and the results are given with figures following this section.
Figure 4.11 shows the maximum achievable power coefficients for a HAWT with 1, 2 and 3 blades and no drag.
The performance for ideal conditions (infinite number of blades) is also shown.
It can be seen that the fewer the blades the lower the possible CP at the same tip-speed ratio.
For that reason most wind turbines use two or three blades and in general most two-bladed wind turbines use a higher tipspeed ratio than most three-bladed wind turbines.
Thus, there is little practical difference in the maximum achievable CP value between typical two- and threebladed designs, assuming no drag.
Moreover, the effect of the number of blades is negligible at high design tip-speed ratios.
The effect of glide ratio on maximum achievable power coefficients for a three-bladed rotor is shown in Figure 4.12.
There is clearly a significant reduction in maximum achievable power as the airfoil drag increases.
It can be seen that it clearly benefits the blade designer to use or design airfoils with low glide ratio.
4.5 BLADE DESIGN PROCEDURE Designing a blade shape from a known airfoil type for an optimum rotor means determining the blade shape parameters; chord length distribution and twist distribution along the blade length for a certain tip-speed ratio at which the power coefficient of the rotor is maximum.
Therefore first of all the change of the power coefficient of the rotor with respect to tip-speed ratio should be figured out in order to determine the design tip-speed ratio, λd corresponding to which the rotor has a maximum power coefficient.
The blade design parameters will then be according to this design tip-speed ratio.
As it can be seen from the equation 4.2.10, the overall power coefficient, C p depends on the relative wind angle ( ϕ ), local tip-speed ratio ( λr ), the glide ratio ( CD / CL ) and the tip loss factor ( F ).
To get maximum C p value from this equation is only possible to make the elemental power coefficient maximum for each blade element.
In other words, the term in the integral of the mentioned equation should be maximum for each blade element in order to get maximum overall power coefficient from the summation of each.
Since the airfoil type is selected before, the glide ratio included in this term can be chosen so as to it gets maximum value.
This can be found from the twodimensional polar diagram of that airfoil.
So the other variables left in the term are the relative wind angle and local tip-speed ratio because the variable, tip-loss factor  71  depends also on these two variables for an assumed blade number as it can be seen from the equation 4.2.1.
Hence a relationship can be established between the relative wind angle and local tip-speed ratio to determine the optimum relative wind angle, ϕopt for a certain local tip-speed ratio.
The condition is given below;  ϕopt   F sin 2 ϕ ( cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ ) ...   → MAX    1 − ( CD CL ) cot ϕ        A computer program on MATLAB was written to determine the maximum power coefficient for each blade element (elemental power coefficient) for any set of values of local tip-speed ratio.
The result is given graphically in Figure 4.2 for an airfoil having glide ratio 0.036  Figure 4.2 Variation of elemental power coefficient with relative wind angles for different values of local tip-speed ratio.
72  These set of results in Figure 4.2 gives a unique relationship between relative wind angle and local tip-speed ratio when the maximum elemental power coefficient is considered.
When the optimum relative wind angle values are plotted with respect to the corresponding local tip-speed ratio values at which the elemental power coefficient is maximum for a wide range of glide ratios, the relationship as shown in Figure 4.3 can be found to be nearly independent of glide ratio and tip-loss factor.
Figure 4.3 Variation of optimum relative wind angle with respect to local tip-speed ratio at optimum elemental power coefficient for B = 3  Hence the condition given before can be rearranged as following;  ϕopt ≈ MAX {sin 2 ϕ ( cos ϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cos ϕ )}  73  Therefore a general relationship can be found between optimum relative wind angle and local tip-speed ratio which will be applicable for any airfoil type by taking the partial derivative of the term above, i.e.
;  ∂ {sin 2 ϕ ( cosϕ − λr sin ϕ )( sin ϕ + λr cosϕ )} = 0 ∂ϕ Equation 4.5.1 reveals after some algebra [2];  (4.5.1)  ϕopt = ( 2 3) tan −1 (1 λr )  (4.5.2)  In Figure 4.4 the plot of equation 4.5.2 is shown together with the others shown in Figure 4.3.
As it can be seen from Figure 4.4 below, the relationship between ϕopt and λr specified by the equation 4.5.2 can be readily used instead of establishing different relationships for each airfoil type.
Figure 4.4 Comparison of equation 4.5.2 with the data found for different glide ratios  74  Having found the solution of determining the optimum relative wind angle for a certain local tip-speed ratio, the rest is nothing but to apply the equations from equation 4.2.7 to 4.2.10, which were derived from the blade-element momentum theory and modified including the tip loss factor, to define the blade shape and to find out the maximum power coefficient for a selected airfoil type.
The procedure of blade design begins with dividing the blade length into N elements.
The local tip-speed ratio for each blade element can then be calculated with the use of equation 2.5.2 and 3.2.17 as given below;  λr ,i = λ ( ri R )  (4.5.3)  Then according to equation 4.5.2 the optimum relative wind angle for each blade element is determined;  ϕopt ,i = ( 2 3) tan −1 (1 λr ,i ) From the equation 4.2.1 the tip loss factor for each blade element is found;  (4.5.4)    − ( B / 2 ) 1 − ( ri R )       Fi = ( 2 π ) cos −1 exp   ( ri R ) sin ϕopt ,i         (4.5.5)  The chord-length distribution can then be calculated for each blade element by using equation 4.2.7;  ci =  8π ri Fi sin ϕopt ,i (cos ϕopt ,i − λr ,i sin ϕopt ,i )  BCL ,design  (sin ϕopt ,i + λr ,i cos ϕopt ,i )  (4.5.6)  where CL ,design is chosen such that the glide ratio is minimum at each blade element.
75  The twist distribution can be determined from the following equation which can be easily derived from the velocity diagram shown in Figure 3.8;  θi = ϕopt ,i − α design  (4.5.7)  Where α design is again the design angle of attack at which CL ,design is obtained.
Finally, the power coefficient is determined using a sum approximating the integral in equation 4.2.10;   8∆λr   2  2  Fi sin ϕopt ,i ( cos ϕopt ,i − λr ,i sin ϕopt ,i )...   C p = ∑  λ   i =1 ( sin ϕopt ,i + λr ,i cos ϕopt ,i ) 1 − ( CD CL ) cot ϕopt ,i  λr2,i      N  (4.5.8)  As a result, for a selected airfoil type and for a specified tip-speed ratio and blade length (i.e.
rotor radius), the blade shape can be designed for optimum rotor and from the calculation of power coefficient the maximum power that can be extracted from the wind can then be found for any average wind velocity.
As an example, the blade chord-length and twist distribution for an optimum three-bladed rotor at the design tip-speed ratio λd = 10 is tabulated in Table 4.1 for the airfoil NACA 4412 whose lift coefficient and drag coefficient values are taken at Re = 1x106 .
76  In Figure 4.5 chord-length distribution with respect to radial location of each blade element both of which are normalized with blade radius is shown.
Figure 4.5 Chord-length distribution for the designed blade  Similarly twist distribution with respect to radial location is illustrated in Figure 4.6.
Finally the power coefficient variation with respect to tip-speed ratio is given graphically in Figure 4.7.
From this figure it can be seen that the design tip-speed ratio should be taken to as 10 where the power coefficient is at maximum value for the designed blade design.
77  Table 4.1 Blade Chord and Twist Distribution for a Three-Bladed HAWT (Airfoil NACA 4412, Cl , design = 1.074 α design = 5.5° γ = 0.0075 )  Local tip-speed ratio  λr  Radial location r/R 0.025 0.075 0.125 0.175 0.225 0.275 0.325 0.375 0.425 0.475 0.525 0.575 0.625 0.675 0.725 0.775 0.825 0.875 0.925 0.975  Chord-length ratio c/R 0.071369 0.10831 0.097031 0.080973 0.067803 0.057746 0.050049 0.044051 0.039279 0.035407 0.03221 0.02953 0.027252 0.02529 0.023573 0.02203 0.020552 0.018897 0.016409 0.01086  θ (deg) 45.143 29.92 20.273 14.33 10.475 7.8221 5.9018 4.4543 3.327 2.4258 1.6895 1.0772  Twist angle  0.25 0.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 2.75 3.25 3.75 4.25 4.75 5.25 5.75 6.25 6.75 7.25 7.75 8.25 8.75 9.25 9.75  0.56018 0.11798 -0.26446 -0.59841 -0.89252 -1.1535 -1.3865 -1.596  78  Figure 4.6 Twist distributions for the designed blade  Figure 4.7 Variation of power coefficient with tip-speed ratio  79Designed blade has a non-linear twist and taper and more importantly even though it had high power coefficient, it was highly loaded.
Therefore, in this study, the blade geometry was simplified and performance of modified blade was examined.
At first, the strongly non-linear taper was replaced with a linear taper.
Among the modified blades whose surfaces are equal to the designed blade's ones, the one which has the highest power output was chosen.
Then the large blade twist was replaced with a linear blade setting angle distribution.
Under these conditions, it was seen that the new modified blade reduced power output approximately 10% of the power output of the designed blade.
This means that in order to extract the same amount of power with the designed blade, the blade span must be expanded approximately 5%.
Finally, all the studies on HAWT blade design were presented on a userinterface computer program written on MATLAB.
User of the blade design program gives the required power output, number of blades, blade profile and design wind velocity as input and the program gives design power coefficient, design tip-speed ratio and rotor diameter as output for both designed and modified blade.
In addition to that, blade geometries were listed for again both designed and modified blade.
The graphical illustration of figures for the comparison of designed and modified blade and three dimensional views of both blades were what the program does lastly.
The studies of this thesis can be surely used for further works.
These further works might be either directly parallel to the topic of this thesis to add valuable usefulness on horizontal-axis wind turbine blade design or related to the studies of this thesis to extend the studies on horizontal-axis wind turbines as they are described in the following paragraphs.
If it is recalled that the modification of a designed blade was carried out for linear taper of chord-length distribution and linear variation of setting angle distribution using least square method, other alternative methods for modification  120  may also be tried and their performance may be compared with their designed blades and with the ones obtained in this study.
In this study, the other constrain is the use of the known airfoil types.
Apart from these, new airfoil designs may be made by the use of XFOIL program and a method of designing new airfoil shapes which show reasonably high performance may be proposed.
The lift and drag behaviors of airfoils are measured in wind tunnels under nonrotating conditions.
Investigations have shown that the same airfoils, when used on a horizontal-axis wind turbine, may exhibit delayed stall and may produce more power than expected.
So the rotor performance prediction considering the delayed stall of airfoils in the operation of HAWTs may be studied.
Besides, blade element-momentum (BEM) theory approach has been used to design HAWT blades.
There are other approaches to predicting blade performance and to designing blades that may be more applicable in some situations.
Vortex wake method, for example, might be used and results of this method can be compared with the results of BLADESIGN.
Structural design of HAWT blades is as important as their aerodynamic design.
The dynamic structural loads which a rotor will experience play the major role in determining the lifetime of the rotor.
Obviously, aerodynamic loads are a major source of loading and must be well understood before the structural response can be accurately determined and also the blade geometry parameters are required for dynamic load analysis of wind turbine rotors.
So such a study on the dynamic load analysis of HAWT blades might also use the outputs of BLADESIGN.
121  REFERENCES  12-  Spera, D. A., "Wind Turbine Technology", Asme Press, 1998 Manwell, J. F., McGowan, J. G., Rogers, A. L., "Wind Energy Explained; Theory, Design and Application", John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2002 Golding, E. W., "The Generation of Electricity by Wind Power", London E. & F. M. Spon Ltd. A Halsted Press Book, 1976 Kovarik, T., Pipher C., Hurst, J., "Wind Energy", Prism Press, 1979 Uyar, T. S., "Türkiye Enerji Sektöründe Karar Verme Ve Rüzgar Enerjisinin Entegrasyonu", Kocaeli Üniversitesi, Teknik Eğitim Fakültesi, 2000 European Wind Energy Association, " WIND FORCE 10, A Blue Print to Achieve 10% of the World's Electricity From Wind Power By 2020", 2000 Hansen, A. C., Butterfield, C. P., "Aerodynamics of HorizontalAxis Wind Turbines", Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol.25, 1993 Le Gourieres, D., "Wind Power Plants, Theory and Design", Pergamon Press, 1982 Duncan, W. J., "An Elementary Treatise on the Mechanics of Fluids", Edward Arnold Ltd, 1962  345-  6-  7-  89-  10- Durand, W. F., "Aerodynamic Theory, Volume 2", Dover Publications, Inc., 1963  122  11- Rijs, R. P. P., Smulders, P. T., "Blade Element Theory for Performance Analysis of Slow Running Wind Turbines", Wind Engineering, Vol.14 No.2, 1990 12- Lock, C. N. H., "Experiments to Verify the Independence of the Elements of an Airscrew Blade", Br.
A.R.C.R and M.953, 1924 13- Wilson, R. E., Lissaman, P. B. S., Walker, S. N., "Aerodynamic Performance of Wind Turbines", Energy Research and Development Administration, 1976 14- Glauert, H., "The Elements of Airfoil and Airscrew Theory", Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1983 15- Zhiquan, Y., Zhaoxue, C., Jingyi, C., Shibao, B., "Aerodynamic Optimum Design Procedure and Program for the Rotor of a Horizontal-Axis Wind Turbine", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.39, 1992 16- Afjeh, A.
A., Keith, T. G., "A Simple Computational Method for Performance Prediction of Tip-Controlled Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.32, 1989 17- Gould, J., Fiddes, S. P., "Computational Methods for the Performance Prediction of HAWTs", ", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.39, 1992 18- Pandey, M. M., Pandey, K. P., Ojha, T. P., "An Analytical Approach to Optimum Design and Peak Performance Prediction for Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines", ", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.32, 1989 19- Nathan, G. K., "A Simplified Design Method and Wind-Tunnel Study of Horizontal-Axis Windmills", ", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.6, 1980  123  20- Vossinis, A., Voutsinas, S., "Computer-Aided Design of Blades: Current Capabilities and Perspectives", http://www.fluid.mech.ntua.gr/wind/avis/avigotem.html 21- Munduate, X., Coton, F. N., "An Aerodynamic Method for the Preliminary Design of Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines", Journal of Advanced Engineering Design, Vol.40, No.1, 2000 22- De Vries, O., "Fluid Aspects of Wind Energy Conversion", AGARD Report 243, 1979 23- Timmer, W. A., van Rooy, R. P. J. O. M., "Thick Airfoils for HAWTs", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.39, 1992 24- Rijs, R. P. P., Jacobs, P., Smulders, P. T., "Parameter Study of the Performance of Slow Running Rotors", Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, Vol.39, 1992 25- Kreyszig, E., Norminton, E. J., "Advanced Engineering Mathematics", John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 8th Edition, 2002 26- Drela, M., "XFOIL Subsonic Airfoil Development System", http://raphael.mit.edu/xfoil , 2001 27- Abbott, I. H., von Doenhoff, A. E., "Theory of Wing Sections, including a summary of airfoil data", Dover Publications, 1959 28- Riegels, F. W., "Aerofoil Sections; results from wind-tunnel investigations, theoretical foundations", Butterworths, 1961 29- MATLAB The Language of Technical Computing, "Building GUIs with MATLAB", Version 6, The Mathworks, Inc., 2002  124  NOMENCLATURE CP : power coefficient of wind turbine rotor : maximum rotor power coefficient : thrust coefficient of wind turbine rotor : local thrust coefficient for each annular rotor section : power output from wind turbine rotor : air mass flow rate through rotor plane : free stream velocity of wind : relative wind velocity : uniform wind velocity at rotor plane : uniform wind velocity at far wake : axial wind velocity at rotor plane : radial wind velocity at rotor plane : angular wind velocity at rotor plane : induced angular velocity due to bound vorticity of rotor blades : axial wind velocity at far wake : radial wind velocity at far wake : angular wind velocity at far wake : area of wind turbine rotor : radius of wind turbine rotor : radial coordinate at rotor plane : radial coordinate at far wake : rotor radius at hub of the blade : blade radius for the ith blade element : pressure of undisturbed air  CP ,max CT CTr  P m U∞ U rel UR Uw u v w i  w′  uw vw ww  A R  r rw rh ri p0  xix  pu pd p′ pw H0 H1  : upwind pressure of rotor : downwind pressure of rotor : pressure drop across rotor plane : pressure at far wake : Bernoulli's constant between free-stream and inflow : Bernoulli's constant between outflow and far wake : rotor thrust : rotor torque : drag force on an annular blade element : lift force on an annular blade element : force on an annular element tangential to the circle swept by the rotor : drag coefficient of an airfoil : lift coefficient of an airfoil : design lift coefficient of an airfoil : tip-loss factor : tip-loss factor for the ith blade element : number of blade elements : number of blades of a rotor : axial induction factor at rotor plane : axial induction factor at far wake : angular induction factor : tip-speed ratio of rotor : design tip-speed ratio : local tip-speed ratio : local tip-speed ratio for the ith blade element : local tip-speed ratio at the hub : corresponding axial induction factor at λr = λh  T Q FD FL  L CD CL CL ,design F Fi N  B a  b a′  λ  λd λr  λr ,i λh a1  xx  a2 c  : corresponding axial induction factor at λr = λ : blade chord length : blade chord length for the ith blade element : air density : angular velocity of wind turbine rotor : angle of attack : design angle of attack : pitch angle (blade setting angle) : pitch angle for the ith blade element : angle of relative wind velocity with rotor plane : optimum relative wind angle : optimum relative wind angle for the ith blade element : solidity ratio : kinematic viscosity of air : glide ratio : circulation along a blade length : incremental circulation along a blade length : Reynolds number : horizontal-axis wind turbine : vertical-axis wind turbine : blade element-momentum theory : tip-speed ratio  ci  ρ Ω α  α design θ  θi  ϕ ϕopt ϕopt ,i σ ν  γ Γ δΓ Re  HAWT VAWT BEM TSR  xxi  CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1.1 OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF THE THESIS The objective of this study is to develop a user-interface computer program on MATLAB for HAWT blade design and power performance prediction using the Blade-Element Momentum (BEM) theory.
The program is well established and can be readily used for the purpose of designing horizontal-axis wind turbine blades.
It takes power required from a wind turbine rotor, number of blades to be used on the rotor, the average wind speed, an airfoil type which can be selected from the airfoil database in the program as input and gives the following as output; blade geometry parameters (twist and chord-length) for both the designed blade and modified blade considering the ease of fabrication and the approximate rotor diameter to be constructed for the specified power.
The program shows the results with figures for making the design decision more clear.
It also gives the three dimensional views and solid models of the designed and modified blades for visualization.
The scope of the thesis is restricted to horizontal-axis wind turbines within two general configurations of wind turbines; namely horizontal-axis and vertical-axis wind turbines.
The following sections of this chapter, however, gives an introductory remarks about wind turbine; its origin, development in history, some innovative types of wind turbines, the exploration of major advantages of horizontal-axis wind turbines over all other wind turbines, technological development and use of horizontal-axis wind turbines around the world.
'In Chapter 2', the detail information on horizontal-axis wind turbines are given.
The concepts and some innovative types of horizontal-axis wind turbines are mentioned.
Then today's modern horizontal-axis wind turbines are introduced giving the common configurations and explanations of their sub-components.
Also nomenclatures used in horizontal-axis wind turbines with their definitions are 1  included.
The control strategies from the aspect of aerodynamic view are examined and major performance parameters are introduced.
Finally, classification of horizontal-axis wind turbines and criteria in horizontal-axis wind turbine design regarding their all sub-components apart from the rotor which is the main scope of this thesis are given.
'In Chapter 3', the aerodynamic behaviors of horizontal-axis wind turbines are dealt with in detail.
All theories on aerodynamic of horizontal-axis wind turbines are examined under separate subtitles for each.
The assumptions made for each theory are emphasized and their physical meanings are explained for the purpose of making the understanding of each theory easier.
xii  LIST OF FIGURES FIGURES Figure 1.1 Early Persian windmill.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
4 Figure 1.2 The Savonius rotor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
6 Figure 1.3 Darrieus rotor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
7 Figure 2.1 Various concepts for horizontal-axis wind turbines.
.
.
.
12 Figure 2.2 Enfield-Andreau turbine (a) General view (b) Diagram of the flow path.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
13 Figure 2.3 Schematic of two common configurations: Upwind, rigid hub, three-bladed and downwind, teetered, two-bladed turbine.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
15 Figure 2.4 Major components of a horizontal-axis wind turbine.
.
.
16 Figure 2.5 Nomenclature and subsystems of HAWT (a) Upwind rotor (b) Downwind rotor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 2.6 Typical plot of rotor power coefficient vs. tip-speed ratio for HAWT with a fixed blade pitch.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 3.1 Idealized flow through a wind turbine represented by a non-rotating, actuator disk.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
28 Figure 3.2 Velocity and pressure distribution along streamtube.
.
.
31 Figure 3.3 Operating parameters for a Betz turbine.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
33 Figure 3.4 Streamtube model of flow behind rotating wind turbine blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 3.5 Geometry of the streamtube model of flow through a HAWT rotor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
xiii  17 22  Figure 2.7 Representative size, height and diameter of HAWTs.
.
.
24  34 35  Figure 3.6 Theoretical maximum power coefficients as a function of tip-speed ratio for an ideal HAWT with and without wake rotation.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
44 Figure 3.7 Schematic of blade elements.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
45 Figure 3.8 Blade geometry for analysis of a HAWT.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
46 Figure 3.9 Tip and root vortices.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
55 Figure 3.10 Variation of bound circulation along blade length.
.
.
.
56 Figure 3.11 Helical vortices replaced by axial and circumferential vortex lines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.1 Relationship between axial induction factor, flow state and thrust of a rotor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
67 Figure 4.2 Variation of elemental power coefficient with relative wind angles for different values of local tip-speed ratio.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
72 Figure 4.3 Variation of optimum relative wind angle with respect to local tip-speed ratio at optimum elemental power coefficient for B=3.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.4 Comprasion of equation 4.5.2 with the data found for different glide ratios.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.5 Chord-length distribution for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
74 77 73 57  Figure 4.6 Twist distribution for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
79 Figure 4.7 Variation of power coefficient with tip-speed ratio.
.
.
.
79 Figure 4.8 Modified blade chord-length variation along the nondimensionalized blade radius.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.9 Modified twist distribution along non-dimensionalized blade radius.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
82 81  xiv  Figure 4.10 Flow chart of the iteration procedure for determining power coefficient of modified blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
83 Figure 4.11 Effect of number of blades on peak performance of optimum wind turbines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
88 Figure 4.12 Effect of Drag/Lift ratio on peak performance of an optimum three-bladed wind turbine.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.13 Effect of drag and tip losses on relative wind angle for optimum design.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
89 Figure 4.14 Relative wind angle for optimum performance of three-bladed wind turbines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.15 Blade chord length distribution for optimum performance of three-bladed wind turbines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.16 Twist angle distribution for modified chord-length of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
90 Figure 4.17 Chord-length distribution of a modified blade for different tip-speed ratio.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
91 Figure 4.18 Twist distribution for modified twist of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.19 Distribution of angle of attack for modified twist of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
92 Figure 4.20 Distribution of angle of attack for modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
92 Figure 4.21 Comparison of power coefficients of modified blades with the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.22 Radial thrust coefficient variation of the designed blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
93 93 91 90 89 88  xv  Figure 4.23 Radial thrust coefficient for modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
94 Figure 4.24 Working range of the designed blade designed at λ = 10 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
94 95 95  Figure 4.25 Working range of modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade designed at λ = 10 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.26 Effect of Reynolds number on peak performance of an optimum three-bladed turbine.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.27 Views of blade elements from root towards tip for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
96 Figure 4.28 Views of blade elements from root towards tip for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
96 Figure 4.29 Isometric view of the blade elements for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.30 Isometric view of the blade elements for the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.31 Three-dimensional solid model of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 4.32 Three-dimensional solid model of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 5.1 Comparison of XFOIL lift coefficient data with data in reference [5] .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
104 Figure 5.2 Comparison of XFOIL drag coefficient data with data in reference [5] .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
104 Figure 5.3 General view of BLADESIGN.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
108 Figure 5.4 Flow Schematic of HAWT Blade Design program.
.
.
.
109 99 98 97 97  xvi  Figure 5.5 Comparison of power coefficient of designed and modified blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 5.6 Comparison of setting angle variation of designed and modified blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Figure 5.7 Comparison of chord-length distribution of designed and modified blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
113 Figure 5.8 Three-dimensional view of the designed blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
114 Figure 5.9 Three-dimensional view of the modified blade.
.
.
.
.
.
.
114 Figure 5.10 Output from the program performed for the sample blade design case .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
115 113 112  xvii  LIST OF TABLES TABLES Table 1.1 Technical wind energy potential and installed capacities in some European countries .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
9 Table 2.1 Scale classification of wind turbines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
23 Table 3.1 Power coefficient, C p ,max as a function of tip-speed ratio λ and a2 .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
43  Table 4.1Blade chord and twist distribution for an optimum three-bladed HAWT.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Table 4.2 Power production of a fixed rotational three-bladed HAWT .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
100 Table 5.1 Design conditions output for designed and modified blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
110 Table 5.2 Blade geometry output for designed and modified blade .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
111 Table 5.3 Comparison of outputs for the airfoils.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Table 5.4 Comparison of rotor diameters for different turbine power outputs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
117 116 78  xviiiCOMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE BLADES  A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE SCHOOL OF NATURAL AND APPLIED SCIENCES OF MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY  BY  SERHAT DURAN  IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF SCIENCE IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING  JANUARY 2005  Approval of the Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences  Prof. Dr. Canan ÖZGEN Director I certify that this thesis satisfies all the requirements as a thesis for the degree of Master of Science.
Prof. Dr. S. Kemal İDER Head of the Department This is to certify that we have read this thesis and that in our opinion it is fully adequate, in scope and quality, as a thesis for degree of Master of Science.
Asst.
Prof. Dr. Tahsin ÇETİNKAYA Co-Supervisor Examining Committee Members Prof. Dr. O. Cahit ERALP Prof. Dr. Kahraman ALBAYRAK Assoc.
Prof. Dr. Cemil YAMALI  Prof. Dr. Kahraman ALBAYRAK Supervisor  (METU, ME) (METU, ME) (METU, ME)  Asst.
Prof. Dr. Tahsin ÇETİNKAYA (METU, ME) Prof. Dr. İ. Sinan AKMANDOR (METU, AEE)  I hereby declare that all information in this document has been obtained and presented in accordance with academic rules and ethical conduct.
I also declare that, as required by these rules and conduct, I have fully cited and referenced all material and results that are not original to this work.
Name, Last name: Serhat DURAN  Signature  :  iii  ABSTRACT COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE BLADES  Duran, Serhat M.S., Department of Mechanical Engineering Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Kahraman ALBAYRAK Co-Supervisor: Asst.
Prof. Dr. Tahsin ÇETİNKAYA January 2005, 124 Pages,  Designing horizontal-axis wind turbine (HAWT) blades to achieve satisfactory levels of performance starts with knowledge of the aerodynamic forces acting on the blades.
In this thesis, HAWT blade design is studied from the aspect of aerodynamic view and the basic principles of the aerodynamic behaviors of HAWTs are investigated.
Blade-element momentum theory (BEM) known as also strip theory, which is the current mainstay of aerodynamic design and analysis of HAWT blades, is used for HAWT blade design in this thesis.
Firstly, blade design procedure for an optimum rotor according to BEM theory is performed.
Then designed blade shape is modified such that modified blade will be lightly loaded regarding the highly loaded of the designed blade and power prediction of modified blade is analyzed.
When the designed blade shape is modified, it is seen that the power extracted from the wind is reduced about 10%  iv  and the length of modified blade is increased about 5% for the same required power.
BLADESIGN which is a user-interface computer program for HAWT blade design is written.
It gives blade geometry parameters (chord-length and twist distributions) and design conditions (design tip-speed ratio, design power coefficient and rotor diameter) for the following inputs; power required from a turbine, number of blades, design wind velocity and blade profile type (airfoil type).
The program can be used by anyone who may not be intimately concerned with the concepts of blade design procedure and the results taken from the program can be used for further studies.
Keywords: Horizontal-Axis Wind Turbine Blades, Wind energy, Aerodynamics, Airfoil  v  ÖZ YATAY EKSENLİ RÜZGAR TÜRBİN PALALARININ BİLGİSAYAR DESTEKLİ AERODİNAMİK TASARIMI  Duran, Serhat Yüksek Lisans, Makine Mühendisliği Bölümü Tez Yöneticisi: Prof. Dr. Kahraman ALBAYRAK Ortak Tez Yöneticisi: Asst.
Prof. Dr. Tahsin ÇETİNKAYA Ocak 2005, 124 Sayfa,  Yatay eksenli rüzgar türbin palalarının tasarımı, öncelikle palalara etkiyen aerodinamik kuvvetlerin bilinmesini gerektirir.
Bu çalışmada, yatay eksenli rüzgar türbin palalarının tasarımı konusu, akışkanlar dinamiği yönünden ele alınmış ve yatay eksenli rüzgar türbinlerinin aerodinamiği ile ilgili temek teoriler incelenmiştir.
Bu çalışmada, yatay eksenli rüzgar türbin palalarının tasarımı için, günümüz rüzgar türbin palalarının tasarımında en sık rastlanan yöntem olan pala elemanı teorisinden faydalanılmıştır.
İlk olarak optimum rotora ait bir palanın tasarımı için gerekli metot oluşturulmuştur.
Daha sonra tasarımı yapılan palaya etkiyen kuvvetlerin büyük olması dikkate alınarak, palanın geometrisi; palaya etkiyen kuvvetler azaltılacak şekilde düzeltilmiş ve geometrisi düzeltilen yeni palaların performansı incelenmiştir.
Bu incelemede, geometrisi düzeltilen palaların performansı;  vi  optimum rotor için tasarlanmış palanın performansına oranla yaklaşık %10 azaldığı görülmüştür.
Ayrıca istenilen belirli bir türbin gücü için, geometrisi düzeltilmiş palanın boyunun, optimum rotor için tasarımı yapılan palanın boyuna oranla yaklaşık %5 daha uzun olması gerektiği görülmüştür.
Yatay eksenli rüzgar türbin palalarının tasarımına yönelik; kullanıcı arayüzüne sahip, BLADESIGN isminde bir bilgisayar programı yazılmıştır.
Program, kullanıcının girdiği; istenilen türbin gücü, pala sayısı, dizayn rüzgar hızı ve pala profile ( airfoil tipi) girdilerine göre pala geometrisi parametreleri (veter uzunluğu ve burulma açısı dağılımları) ile dizayn şartlarındaki gerekli değerleri (dizayn uç hız oranı, dizayn güç katsayısı ve rotor çapı) vermektedir.
Program, pala tasarımı konusunda detaylı bilgiye sahip olmayan kullanıcılarına, programın verdiği sonuçları kullanarak başka konularda çalışmada bulunabilmesine imkan vermektedir.
Anahtar Sözcükler: Yatay Eksenli Rüzgar Türbin Palaları, Rüzgar Enerjisi, Aerodinamik, Pala Profili  vii  To My Family  viii  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The author would like to express his deepest gratitude and appreciation to his supervisor, Prof. Dr. Kahraman Albayrak and Co-Supervisor, Asst.
Prof. Dr. Tahsin Çetinkaya for their invaluable guidance and encouragement throughout this study.
The author especially thanks his supervisor for his patience and trust during the study.
The author also would like to thank his colleagues and ASELSAN Inc. for their supports.
ix  TABLE OF CONTENTS PLAGIARISM .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
iii ABSTRACT.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
iv ÖZ.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
vi DEDICATION.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
viii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
ix TABLE OF CONTENTS.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
x LIST OF FIGURES.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
xiii LIST OF TABLES.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
xviii NOMENCLATURE.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
xix CHAPTERS 1.INTRODUCTION.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 1.1 Objective and Scope of the Thesis.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1 1.2 Historical Development of Windmills.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3 1.3 Technological Developments of Modern Wind Turbines.
.
.
.
9 2.HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINES.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11 2.1 Introduction.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11 2.2 Horizontal-Axis Wind Turbine Concepts.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11 2.3 Modern Horizontal-Axis Wind Turbines.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
14 2.3.1 The rotor subsystem.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
17 2.3.2 The power-train subsystem.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
19 2.3.3 The nacelle structure subsystem.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
19  x   2.3.4 The tower subsystem and the foundation.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
19 2.3.5 The controls.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
20 2.3.6 The balance of electrical subsystem.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
20 2.4 Aerodynamic Controls of HAWTs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
20 2.5 Performance Parameters of HAWTs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
22 2.6 Classification of HAWTs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
23 2.7 Criteria in HAWT Design.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
24  3.AERODYNAMICS OF HAWTs.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
26 3.1 Introduction.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
26 3.2 The Actuator Disk Theory and The Betz Limit.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
27 3.3 The General Momentum Theory.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
33 3.4 Blade Element Theory.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
44 3.5 Blade Element-Momentum (BEM) Theory.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
50 3.6 Vortex Theory.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
54 4.HAWT BLADE DESIGN.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
62 4.1 Introduction.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
62 4.2 The Tip-Loss Factor.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
63 4.3 HAWT Flow States.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
66 4.4 Airfoil Selection in HAWT Blade Design.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
69 4.5 Blade Design Procedure .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.71 4.6 Modification of Blade Geometry.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
80 4.6.1 Modification of Chord-Length Distribution.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
80 4.6.2 Modification of Twist Distribution.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
81 4.7 Power Prediction of Modified Blade Shape.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
82 4.8 Results.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
84 xi  5.
COMPUTER PROGRAM FOR BLADE DESIGN.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
101 5.1 Introduction.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
101 5.2 XFOILP4.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
102 5.2 BLADESIGN.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
105 5.3 Sample Blade Design on BLADESIGN Program .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
109 5.4 Comparison of Outputs .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
116 6.
CONCLUSION .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
118 REFERENCES.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
122    The wind continued to be major source of energy in Europe through the period just prior to the Industrial Revolution, but began to recede in importance after that time.
The reason that wind energy began to disappear is primarily attributable to its non-dispatchability and its non-transportability.
In addition to that, with the invention of the steam engine, the internal combustion engine and the development of electricity, the use of wind turbines was often neglected and abandoned [1].
Prior to its demise, the European wind turbines had reached a high level of design sophistication.
In the latter wind turbines, the majority of the turbine was stationary.
Only the top would be moved to face wind.
Yaw mechanisms included both manually operate arms and separate yaw rotors.
Blades had acquired somewhat of an airfoil shape and included some twist.
The power output of some turbines could be adjusted by an automatic control system [1].
The re-emergence of wind energy can be considered to have begun in the late 1960s.
Many people became awareness of the environmental consequences of industrial development.
Nearly all authorities concerning in energy began arguing that unfettered growth would inevitably lead to either disaster or change.
Among the culprits identified were fossil fuels.
The potential dangers of nuclear energy also became more public at this time.
Discussion of these topics formed the backdrop for an environmental movement which began to advocate cleaner sources of energy [2].
7  During the 1990s many wind power manufacturers spread all over the Europe, particularly Denmark and Germany.
Concerns about global warming and continued apprehensions about nuclear power have resulted in a strong demand for more wind generation there and in other countries as well.
Over the last 25 years, the size of the largest commercial wind turbines has increased from approximately 50 kW to 2 MW, with machines up to 5 MW under design.
The total installed capacity in the world as of the year 2001 was approximately 20.000 MW, with the majority of installations in Europe.
Offshore wind energy systems are also under active development in Europe.
Design standards and machine certifications procedures have been established, so that the reliability and performance are far superior to those of the 1970s and 1980s.
The cost of energy from wind has dropped to the point that in some sites it is nearly competitive with conventional sources, even without incentives [2].
Turkey has enormous wind energy potential as to European countries in that wind energy sources of Turkey are theoretically enough for meeting its electrical energy need.
83000 MW of this wind energy potential can be technically used for electricity production in Turkey, especially the region of Marmara, Ege, Bozcaada, Gökçeada, Sinop and the around of İskenderun are considered to have enough wind energy potential for the production of electricity.
Today the installed capacity of electrical energy production fro the wind energy in Turkey is 27 MW, 15 Mw of this amount of energy is from the established two wind farms in Çeşme and the other amount comes from the wind farm established in Bozcaada [5].
In Table 1.1, the wind energy potential and installed capacity of electrical energy production from the wind energy in some European countries by the year 1998 are given [6].
From this table it is seen that Turkey should utilize the wind energy for electrical energy production much more than its installed capacity now.
8  Table 1.1 Technical wind energy potential and installed capacities in some European countries  Countries Turkey Denmark Germany England Greece France Italy Spain Sweden  Technical Wind Energy Potential (MW) 83.000 14.000 12.000 57.000 22.000 42.000 35.000 43.000 20.000  Installed Capacity (MW) 27 1420 2874 338 55 21 197 880 170  1.3 TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS OF MODERN WIND TURBINES Wind turbine technology, dormant for many years, awoke at the end of the 20th century to a world of new opportunities.
Developments in many other areas of technology were adapted to wind turbines and have helped to hasten re-emergence.
A few of the many areas which have contributed to the new generation of wind turbines include material science, computer science, aerodynamics, analytical methods, testing and power electronics.
Material science has brought new composites for the blades and alloys for the metal components.
Developments in computer science facilitate design, analysis, monitoring and control.
Aerodynamics design methods, originally developed for the aerospace industry, have now been adapted to wind turbines.
Analytical methods have now developed to the point where it is possible to have much clearer understanding of how a new design should perform than was previously possible.
Testing using a vast array of commercially available sensors and data collection and analysis equipment allows designers to better understand how the new turbines actually perform.
Power  9  electronics is relatively new area which is just beginning to be used with wind turbines.
Power electronic devices can help connect the turbine's generator smoothly to the electrical network; allow the turbine to run at variable speed, producing more energy, reducing fatigue damage and benefiting the utility in the process; facilitate operation in a small, isolated network; and transfer energy to and from storage [2].
The trends of wind turbines have evolved a great deal over the last 25 years.
They are more reliable, more cost effective and quieter.
It can not be concluded that the evolutionary period is over, however.
It should still be possible to reduce the cost of energy at sites with lower wind speeds.
Turbines for use in remote communities remain to be made commercially viable.
The world of offshore wind energy is just in its infancy.
There are tremendous opportunities in offshore locations but many difficulties to be overcome.
As wind energy comes to supply an ever larger fraction of the world's electricity, the issues of intermittency transmission and storage must be revisited.
There will be continuing pressure for designers to improve the cost effectiveness of wind turbines for all applications.
Improved engineering methods for the analysis, design and for mass-produced manufacturing will be required.
Opportunities also exist for the development of new materials to increase wind turbine life.
Increased consideration will need to be given to the requirements of specialized applications.
In all cases, the advancement of the wind industry represents an opportunity and a challenge for a wide range of disciplines, especially including mechanical, electrical, materials, aeronautical, controls and civil engineering as well as computer science [2].
10  The results are obtained from the program by giving the coordinates of an airfoil.
XFOIL first takes these coordinates and creates the contour geometry of the airfoil and finally by dividing the surface of the airfoil into a certain number of  104  panels, which can be changed by the user, gives the variations of lift coefficient and drag coefficient with respect to angle of attack.
In developing the airfoil database for the blade design program, the characteristics of airfoil have been obtained with the viscous mode analysis of XFOIL and for the Reynolds number in the order of 1 million and also Mach number has been setted to zero considering that the angular velocity of a HAWT blades does not become so great that the rotational velocity of the blade tips approaches to the velocity of sound.
5.2 BLADESIGN As it was stated before, the main objective of this thesis is to develop a userinterface computer program on HAWT blade design.
The main purpose of constructing such a program is to collect and represent all the studies of this thesis in a visual and more understandable way and also to provide a design program for the users who are dealing with HAWT blade design.
For all of these reasons a userinterface computer program on HAWT blade design was written.
The general view of the program and its working flow schematic are illustrated in Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4 respectively.
The main features of the program can be summarized as below: • The program was written on MATLAB, version 6 [29].
• The program gives various error dialog boxes in case of incorrect input data or requesting an output of a command before this command some other commands should be executed firstly and necessary outputs for the requesting command should be firstly obtained.
By so the program serves as a guide for the user to perform the design procedure step by step.
• The density of air, ρ is taken as 1.2 kg/m3 in some algorithms of the program for the calculation of rotor diameter.
105  • The program includes one input part and four output parts.
• Input part requires the following information; turbine power required in Watt, design wind velocity in m/s, the number of blades supposed to be used on the rotor and airfoil type to be used for the blade profile.
Here the design wind velocity is the average wind velocity of an area where the turbine or windfarm of similar turbines is to be set.
Following airfoils are currently available in the database; NACA 4412, NACA 4415, NACA 4421, NACA 23012, NACA 23015, NACA 23021, NACA 63-210, NACA 63-212, NACA 63-218, NACA 63-221 and SERIS809.
• The output parts are composed of design condition output, blade geometry output, 3-D visualization output and figures output.
Design condition output part gives the information for both designed blade and its modified blade.
These information are design power coefficient (CP), corresponding design tip-speed ratio (λd) and rotor diameter in meter to be constructed for the specified turbine power input.
Blade geometry output part shows the chord-length in meter and setting angle in degree for each blade element (for each station) and does this again for both designed and modified blade.
The number of stations in the program has been kept constant with 30 because it has been seen that the increase of number of stations does not change the blade geometry values considerably much.
The purpose of putting this output part is that these output information can be used for the prototype production of the design blade in further studies.
3-D visualization output part gives three dimensional views of the designed and modified blades on separate windows.
The last output part, figures output part illustrates the results with figures for both designed and modified blade.
The first figure shows the variation of power coefficient with tip-speed ratio, the second one shows the distribution of setting angle in degrees with respect to normalized blade length (r/R) and the last figure is 106  for the output of chord-length distribution, which is normalized with R, with respect to again normalized blade length (r/R) graphically.
These figures can be analyzed visually to compare the performance and blade geometry of designed and modified blade by making both of the outputs visible.
• If it is desired to change the input values for another design, the command 'change inputs' in the input part stands for this purpose.
By pressing this button, all the outputs will become vanished and the program gets ready for the new input values.
• Blade geometry output (chord-length and setting angle values for each station) can be saved to a file in the working directory with the command 'save blade geometries' or can be print out with the command 'print' and the program  closes with the command 'exit'' under the file menu option.
107  Figure 5.3 General view of BLADESIGN  108  3-D view of designed blade  3-D view of modified blade Design Power Coefficient,CP 3-D visualization Designed Blade Design Tip-Speed Ratio Rotor Diameter, D (m) Design Power Coefficient,CP Design Tip-Speed Ratio Rotor Diameter, D (m) Stations (Blade elements) Designed Blade Chord-Length Distribution (m) Setting Angle Distribution (deg) Stations (Blade elements) Figures Modified Blade Modified Blade Chord-Length Distribution (m) Setting Angle Distribution (deg)  Turbine Power Required, P (W)  Design Wind Velocity, U∞ (m/s)  Number of Blades, B  I N P U T S  Airfoil Type  E X E C U T I O N Designed Blade  Design Conditions  O U T P U T S  Modified Blade  Blade Geometry  CP & λ c/R & r/R θ & r/R CP & λ c/R & r/R θ & r/R  Figure 5.4 Flow Schematic of HAWT Blade Design program5.3 SAMPLE BLADE DESIGN ON BLADESIGN PROGRAM In this section a sample blade design will be demonstrated on blade design program according to the following inputs: Turbine power required, P Design wind velocity, U∞ Number of blades, B Airfoil type = 50 kW (50000W) = 13 m/s =3 = SERI-S809  First task is to find the design power coefficient which is dependent on the selected airfoil type.
Then the design tip-speed ratio at which the maximum power coefficient (i.e.
design power coefficient) can be obtained for the three-bladed rotor.
This design tip-speed ratio can be used to determine the rotational velocity of the rotor at design condition.
Finally rotor diameter is found out with the known values of design power coefficient and design wind velocity and required power.
(Equation 2.5.1)  109  Design conditions output part calculates the mentioned values for both  designed and modified blade.
Pressing the 'designed' and 'modified' pushbuttons in the design coefficient output part, those values shown in Table 5.1 will be obtained from the program.
Note that design tip-speed ratio is same for both blades because the designed blade is modified at its design tip-speed ratio.
Also note that when the designed blade is modified, the power is decreased by 10% of the designed one or for the same power output the rotor diameter should be increased by about 7% of the designed rotor diameter.
Table 5.1 Design conditions output for designed and modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  Output Design Power Coefficient Design Tip-Speed Ratio Rotor Diameter (m)  Designed Blade 0.495 8.5 9.8  Modified Blade 0.44 7 10.5  The second output part documents the chord-length and setting angle distributions for each blade element beginning from approximately 1.5% of the blade length and ending at 98% of the blade length.
In other words program calculates the blade geometry parameters dividing the total blade length into 30 elements.
Pressing again the 'designed blade' and 'modified blade' pushbuttons in the blade geometry output part, those values shown in Table 5.2 will be obtained from the program.
110  Table 5.2 Blade Geometry output for designed and modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B= 3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  Designed Blade Stations (Blade elements) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 ChordLength c (m) 0.367 0.754 0.852 0.825 0.758 0.685 0.617 0.558 0.507 0.463 0.426 0.394 0.365 0.341 0.320 0.300 0.283 0.268 0.254 0.241 0.230 0.220 0.201 0.200 0.190 0.180 0.167 0.151 0.125 0.078 Setting angle θ (deg) 49.1 39.1 30.9 24.6 19.9 16.3 13.5 11.3 9.5 8.1 6.8 5.8 5.0 4.2 3.6 3.0 2.5 2.1 1.7 1.4 1.0 0.7 0.4 0.2 -0.03 -0.25 -0.4 -0.6 -0.8 -1  Modified Blade ChordSetting Length c angle θ (m) (deg) 0.780 25.7 0.756 24.6 0.732 23.3 0.710 22.2 0.686 21.0 0.662 19.8 0.640 18.6 0.616 17.5 0.592 16.3 0.570 15.1 0.546 13.9 0.522 12.7 0.499 11.5 0.475 10.3 0.452 9.2 0.430 8.0 0.405 6.8 0.382 5.6 0.360 4.5 0.335 3.3 0.312 2.1 0.289 0.9 0.265 0 0.242 0 0.219 0 0.195 0 0.172 0 0.149 0 0.125 0 0.102 0  For the comparison of power coefficient and blade geometry parameters (chord-length and twist distribution) between designed blade and its modified one their figures can be plotted on the right half of the program.
If 'designed' toggle  111  button in blue color is pressed, figures related to designed blade will be plotted with blue color and when the toggle button becomes in depressed position by pressing it again, figures related to the designed blade will be erased.
Similarly if 'modified' toggle button in red color is pressed, figures related to modified blade  will be plotted with red color and will be erased in case of depressed position of the toggle button.
Power coefficient with respect to tip-speed ratio, setting angle variation with respect to normalized blade length (r/R) and normalized chordlength distribution (c/R) with respect to normalized blade length (r/R) figures for the sample blade design case are shown in Figure 5.5, Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7 respectively.
Note that as discussed in chapter 4 the working range of modified blade becomes very narrow with respect to that of designed blade for a fixed rotational speed rotor.
Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9 shows the three dimensional views of designed and modified blade for the sample blade design case as one activates the push buttons under the 3-D visualization output part.
Finally how the results which have been given in tabulated form here looks on the user-interface program for this sample blade design case are given in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.5 Comparison of power coefficient of designed and modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  112  Figure 5.6 Comparison of setting angle variation of designed and modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  Figure 5.7 Comparison of chord-length distribution of designed and modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  113  Figure 5.8 Three-dimensional view of the designed blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  Figure 5.9 Three-dimensional view of the modified blade (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  114  Figure 5.10 Output from the program performed for the sample blade design case (P= 50 kW, U∞= 13 m/s, B=3, SERI-S809 airfoil)  115  5.4 COMPARISON OF OUTPUTS The program was executed for each airfoil in the database and the outputs of design conditions were obtained as illustrated in Table 5.3.
The design angle of attack and corresponding glide ratios (CD/CL) for each airfoil are also put in this table in order to see the effect of glide ratio on the design power coefficient.
When the design power coefficients of the airfoils are compared, it is seen that the glide ratio decreases the design power coefficient as it was stated before.
And the reduction in design power coefficient of the designed blade becomes approximately 10% after modification of the designed blade.
Similarly for the same power output, the increase in the rotor diameter of the designed blade becomes about 5% after modification.
Table 5.3 Comparison of outputs for the airfoils (P= 50kW, U∞=10 m/s, B=3)  116  In Table 5.4 the rotor diameters for different turbine power outputs for both designed and modified blade are given.
It is seen that the modification of the design blade increases the rotor diameter but this increase may be accepted regarding the moderate loading of the modified blades as it was explained in chapter 5.
Table 5.4 Comparison of rotor diameters for different turbine power outputs (U∞=13m/s, B=3, SERI-S809)  117  CHAPTER 6 CONCLUSION In this study, aerodynamic design of horizontal-axis wind turbine blades was investigated and a user-interface computer program called as BLADESIGN was written on HAWT blade design software for the use of its outputs in further studies.
Wind turbine blades are the pivot of the other parts of a wind turbine in electricity production since they extract the energy from the wind and carry this energy to generators which produce electricity.
The interaction between the wind and the blades is related to the aerodynamic forces acting on the blades.
While the wind is passing through the area swept by a rotor it leaves its some part of energy on the blades resulting from this aerodynamic interaction.
Hence it is limited to the aerodynamic aspect during the study of HAWT blade design.
Aerodynamic theories related to HAWT blade design were investigated extensively.
Firstly the simplest aerodynamic model of a HAWT, the actuator disk theory was discussed.
The main outcome of this theory is that it is impossible to extract more than 59% of the usable amount of wind energy under the ideal conditions which were stated as the assumptions of this theory.
Since the actuator disk theory is an idealized model which will never be realized for real operation of wind turbines, the general momentum theory is then needed to be discussed.
The main outcome of this theory is a measure of the effects of rotation on the relative values of the induced velocities at the rotor and in the wake.
Although the general momentum theory predicts the rotor performance, it fails to give any information about the rotor geometry.
This deficiency requires the next discussion which is blade element theory.
In the blade element theory, the  118  equations required to find the torque and thrust force on the rotor were found in terms of blade geometry parameters.
The results of this theory provide to make relations between the rotor performance and rotor geometry.
The ultimate goal was to relate the results of general momentum theory and blade element theory in order to get the enough equations for HAWT blade design.
This was achieved in the discussion of blade element-momentum theory (BEM).
After the equations resulted from this theory were obtained, a tip correction method was applied to the theory.
In this study, linearized tip correction method was used to take the effect of number of blades into account.
This method uses Prandtl's tip correction factor which is related to the reduction of the circulation around a rotor blade.
It was also briefly explained about vortex theory for the purpose of giving the physical explanation of induced velocity definitions made in the previous theories.
The origin of axial and angular induction factors was explained and the assumptions of the previous theories were clarified with the explanation of this theory.
Blade design was performed beginning with the optimization of blade geometry aerodynamically.
Aerodynamic optimization for a wind turbine means to design a blade geometry which gives the maximum power output.
For the optimization, it was graphically shown that the effect of airfoil characteristics (glide ratio) and the tip-loss effect were negligible on rotor performance.
So the unique relationship was found between the relative wind angle and local tip-speed ratio for the determination of optimum condition for each blade element.
For a chosen blade profile and a tip-speed ratio, the setting angle and chord-length variation along the blade length were then calculated together with the power coefficients.
The calculations shows that power coefficient increases with increasing design lift coefficient and decreasing drag coefficient of blade profile.
This means that the development in profile data is needed for better optimization.
119  'In Chapter 4', HAWT blade design procedure is given based on the BEM theory.
Equations obtained from BEM theory in chapter 3 are modified considering various corrections including tip-losses and thrust coefficient modifications.
It is mentioned about the airfoil selection criteria in HAWT blade design.
How airfoil characteristics affect the performance of a blade is discussed as well.
Design procedure is then studied for a designed blade and the validity of an approximation used for determining the optimum relative wind angle for a certain local tip-speed ratio is explained and illustrated with figures.
Modification of the designed blade regarding the ease of fabrication is discussed, modification of chord-length distribution of the designed blade and modification of twist distribution of the designed blade are studied and the performance of modified blade is analyzed and compared with that of designed blade.
At the end of this chapter results are given with illustrative figures.
In blade design of HAWT the effect of parameters such as effect of Reynolds number, effects of number of blades etc.
are discussed and some explanatory comment for each parameter showing on the figures are made.
'In Chapter 5', the computer programs namely XFOIL used for airfoil analysis and the user-interface program on HAWT blade design; BLADESIGN developed on MATLAB are introduced.
An example of blade design performed on the mentioned program is given.
2  1.2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF WINDMILLS Even though today's modern technology has firmly and rightly established the definition of wind turbine as the prime mover of a wind machine capable of being harnessed for a number of different applications, none of which are concerned with the milling of grain or other substances (at least industrialized countries), the term windmill was used for the whole system up to recent time, whatever its duty, be it generating electricity, pumping water, sawing wood.
Since here the historical development of wind machine is considered it is convenient and has certain logic in it to retain its term, windmill in its historic sense [1].
The windmill has had a singular history among prime movers.
Its existence as a provider of useful mechanical power has been known for the last thousands years.
The earliest mentions of the use of wind power come from the East India, Tibet, Persia and Afghanistan.
It is also mentioned that the wind power was used to play the organ instrument in İskenderiye about two thousands years ago.
Nearly all stories and the records we have about windmill from between the first and twelfth centuries come from the Near East and Central Asia and those regions of the world are generally considered to be the birthplace of the windmill.
The first record of the use of the windmill is seen in the tenth century in Persia.
Inhabitants who lived in Eastern Persia, which bordered on Afghanistan today, utilized the windmill, which were vertical-axis and drag type of windmill as illustrated in Figure 1.1.
The invention of the vertical-axis windmills subsequently spread in the twelfth century throughout Islam and beyond to the Far East.
The basic definition of the primitive vertical-axis windmills were imported in the later centuries such as placing the sails above millstones , elevating the driver to a more open exposure which improved the output by exposing the rotor to higher wind speeds and using of reeds instead of cloth to provide the working surface [1].
3  Figure 1.1 Early Persian windmill [2]  However, it lies in the fact that the vertical-axis Persian windmills never came into use in Europe.
At the end of the twelfth century, there was an efflorescence of a completely different type, the horizontal-axis windmill.
This development present second enigma in the technical development of the wind turbine that occurred some thousands years after the enigma left by Persian vertical-axis windmills [1].
Before European countries, horizontal-axis windmills were designed by Ebulİz (1153) from Artuk Turks and used in the region of Diyarbakır in 1200's.
However, Northwest Europe, particularly France, Germany, Great Britain, Iberia and the Low Countries are considered to be the first region that developed the most effective type of windmill, one in which the shaft carrying the sails was oriented horizontally rather than vertically as in the Persian mill.
In a relatively short time, tens of thousands of what it is called horizontal-axis European windmills were in use for nearly all mechanical task, including water pumping, grinding grain, sawing wood and powering tools.
The familiar cruciform pattern of their sails prevailed for almost 800 years, from the twelfth to the twentieth century [1].
The horizontal-axis windmill was a considerably more complex mechanism than the Persian vertical-axis windmill since it presented several engineering problems three major of which were transmission of power from a horizontal rotor shaft to a vertical shaft, on which the grindstones were set, turning the mill into the  4  wind and stopping the rotor when necessary.
But the adoption of horizontal-axis windmill is readily explained by the fact that it was so much more efficient [1].
In the historical development of windmills, it must be required the consideration of very innovative step that warrants somewhat more attention that it has received, the use of horizontal-axis windmills instead of vertical-axis ones.
Although the right angle gear mechanism allowed the rotor axis to be transposed from vertical to horizontal, the action of sails also had to be turned through 90°.
This was revolutionary because it meant that the simple, straightforward push of the wind on the face of the sail was replaced by the action of the wind in flowing smoothly around the sail, providing a force normal to the direction of the wind.
As a concept, it is indeed a sophisticated one that was not fully developed until the advent of the airplane at the end of the nineteenth century and the engineering science of aerodynamics [1].
The transition from windmills supplying mechanical power to wind turbines producing electrical energy took place during the last dozen years of the nineteenth century.
The initial use of wind for electric generation, as opposed to for mechanical power, included the successful commercial development of small wind generators and research and experiments using large turbines.
The advent and development of the airplane in the first decades of the twentieth century gave rise to intense analysis and design studies of the propeller that could immediately be applied to the wind turbine [1].
An innovative type of wind turbine rotor, the Savonius rotor, was named after its inventor, Finnish engineer S.J.
Savonius.
The inventor's interest had been aroused by the Flettner rotor ship with its large, rotating cylindrical sails.
.Wind passing over these cylinders created lift by the Magnus effect, which propelled the ship forward.
He was intrigued by the possibility of substituting wind power for the external motor power used to rotate these cylinders on the Flettner ship.
His experiments resulted in a rotor with an S-shaped cross section which, in its simplest form, could be constructed by cutting a circular cylinder in half longitudinally and  5  rejoining opposite edges along an axle, an illustration of a more modern one is given in Figure 1.2.
According to the inventor, the Savonius rotor achieved some popularity in Europe especially in Finland, but it has not prospered commercially as a means for driving an electrical generator.
It had advantages having high starting torque and the ability to accept wind from any direction; its drawbacks were low speed and heavy weight [3].
Figure 1.2 The Savonius rotor [3]  Another innovative rotor design introduced in the early 1930s was a type of vertical-axis turbine invented by F.M.Darrieus.
The Darrieus rotor, which is illustrated in Figure 1.3, has two or three curved blades attached top and bottom to a central column, accepting the wind from all directions without yawing.
This column rotates in upper and lower bearings and transmits torque from the blades to the power train, which is located below the rotor, where the maintenance is easier and weight is not quite so important [4].
6  Figure 1.3 Darrieus rotor [4] CHAPTER 2 HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINES 1.2 INTRODUCTION A wind turbine is a machine which converts the power in the wind into electricity.
This is contrast to a windmill, which is a machine that converts the wind's power into mechanical power.
There are two great classes of wind turbines, horizontal- and vertical-axis wind turbines.
Conventional wind turbines, horizontal-axis wind turbines (HAWT), spin about a horizontal axis.
As the name implies, a vertical-axis wind turbine (VAWT) spins about a vertical axis.
Today the most common design of wind turbine and the only kind discussed in this thesis in the view of aerodynamic behavior is the horizontal-axis wind turbines.
In this chapter, detail information about the conventional horizontal-axis wind turbines will be given but before that some unconventional and innovative horizontal-axis wind turbine concepts will be mentioned.
2.2 HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE CONCEPTS In Figure 2.1, various concepts for horizontal axis wind turbines are illustrated.
A few words are in order to summarize briefly some of these concepts to see the evolutionary process that led to modern horizontal axis wind turbine configurations used all over the world.
Enfield-Andreau type of horizontal axis wind turbine is a unique concept in which mechanical coupling between the turbine and the generator is eliminated by driving the generator pneumatically.
The turbine rotor has hollow blades with open tips and acts as a centrifugal air pump.
As illustrated in Figure 2.2, air is drawn in  11  Figure 2.1 Various concepts for horizontal-axis wind turbines [2]  12  through side vents in the tower shell, passing upward to drive an enclosed highspeed air turbine coupled directly to the generator.
After flowing through the rotor hub into the hollow turbine blades, it is finally expelled from the blade tips.
While the Enfield-Andreau turbine operated successfully, it had a low overall efficiency.
High drag losses in the internal flow paths were suspected to be the cause.
After it had been operated intermittently, it was shut down permanently after suffering bearing failures at the blade roots [1].
(a)  (b)  Figure 2.2 Enfield-Andreau turbine (a) General view (b) Diagram of the flow path [1]  The other concept is the multiple rotors in the same plane on a single tower which had been designed as a method of achieving high power levels with rotors of intermediate size.
Studies on this concept concluded that it was more cost-effective to use multiple turbines or larger turbines than to pay for the complex structure needed to support.
But today no actual design work (much less experimental work) was undertaken [1].
13  Another unconventional innovative wind turbine concept is a wind turbine composed of counter-rotating blades in other words multiple rotors on the same axis as illustrated in Figure 2.1.
This system differs from the multiple rotors on the same plane mentioned just before in that multiple rotors on the same plane increase net swept area while counter-rotating blades on the same axis does share the net swept area.
Advocates of such systems usually misunderstand the physics behind wind energy conversion.
The effects of induced velocity limit the theoretical maximum power coefficient of two rotors on the same axis to little more than that of a single rotor.
Counter-rotation does decrease the rotational energy lost in the wake, but this benefit is trivial compared to the costs of the second rotor and associated gearing.
These systems have rarely been successful, much less costeffective [1].
Another concept that appears periodically is the concentrator.
The idea is to channel the wind to increase the productivity of the rotor.
The problem was that the cost of building an effective concentrator which can also withstand occasional extreme winds has always been more than the device was worth [2].
2.3 MODERN HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINES All those unconventional horizontal-axis wind turbines described in the previous section led to the conventional modern horizontal-axis wind turbines which are the wind turbine systems with a low-solidity rotor powered by aerodynamic lift driving an electrical generator, with all rotating components mounted on a tower.
Today's modern horizontal-axis wind turbines are generally classified according to the rotor orientation (upwind or downwind of the tower), blade articulation (rigid or teetering), number of blades (generally two or three blades), rotor control (pitch vs. stall) and how they are aligned with the wind (free yaw or active yaw).
14  Figure 2.3 shows typical upwind and downwind configurations along with definitions for blade coning and yaw orientation.
The term upwind rotor and downwind rotor denote the location of the rotor with respect to the tower.
The downwind turbines were favored initially in the world, but the trend has been toward greater use of upwind rotors with a current splint between 55% upwind and 45% downwind configurations [7].
Small wind generators are usually of the upwind type for two principle reasons: (1) a simple tail vane is all that is needed to keep the blades pointed into the wind and (2) a furling mechanism that turns the blades out of the wind stream to protect the machine from high winds is easier for design and fabricate for an upwind rotor.
The downwind configuration is usually preferred for larger machines, where a tail vane would not be practical.
One problem with the downwind configuration is tower shadow.
The tower acts as a barrier to the wind stream and each time a rotating blade passes the tower it is subjected to the changes in wind speed, which causes stresses that vary with the exact amount of wind blocked by the rotor [1].
Figure 2.3 Schematic of the two common configurations.
Upwind, rigid hub, three-bladed and downwind, teetered, two-bladed turbine [7]  15  The principal subsystems of a typical horizontal-axis wind turbine as shown in Figure 2.4 include [2]: • The rotor, consisting of the blades and the supporting hub • The power train, which includes the rotating parts of the wind turbine (exclusive of the rotor); it usually consists of shafts, gearbox, coupling, a mechanical brake and the generator • The nacelle structure and main frame; including wind turbine housing, bedplate and the yaw system • The tower and the foundation • The machine controls • The balance of the electrical system, including cables, switchgear, transformers and possibly electronic power converters  Figure 2.4 Major components of a horizontal-axis wind turbine [2]  16  A short introduction to the nomenclature illustrated in Figure 2.5 for both upwind and downwind HAWT together with the overview of components follows.
(a)  (b)  Figure 2.5 Nomenclature and subsystems of HAWT (a) Upwind rotor (b) Downwind rotor [1]  2.3.1 THE ROTOR SUBSYSTEM: The rotor consists of the hub and blades of the wind turbine.
These are often considered to be its most important components from both performance and overall cost standpoint.
The rotor may be single-, double-, three-, or four-bladed, or multi-bladed.
A single-bladed wind rotor requires a counter-weight to eliminate vibration but this design is not practical where icing on the one blade could throw the machine out of balance.
The twobladed rotor was the most widely used because it is strong and simple and less  17  expensive than the three-bladed rotor, but in the recent times three-bladed rotor type becomes more widely used one in that the three-bladed rotor distributes stresses more evenly when the machine turns, or yaws, during changes in wind direction.
For example a two-bladed rotor with a tail vane would yaw in a series of jerking motions because at the instant the rotor was vertical it offered no centrifugal force resistance to the horizontal movement of the tail vane in following changes in wind direction.
At the instant the two-bladed rotor is in the horizontal position its centrifugal force, which is at maximum, resists the horizontal movement of the tail vane.
The three-bladed rotor cures this problem, which produces a high level of vibration in the machine, by creating a steady centrifugal force against which the tail vane moves smoothly to shift the direction of the wind turbine [8].
An unconed rotor is one in which the spanwise axes of all of the blades lie in the same plane.
Blade axes in a coned rotor are tilted downwind from a plane normal to the rotor axis, at a small coning angle.
This helps to balance the downwind bending of the blade caused by aerodynamic loading with upwind bending by radial centrifugal forces.
Tower clearance (the minimum distance between a blade tip and the tower) is influenced by blade coning, rotor teetering and elastic deformation of the blades under load.
Often an axis-tilt angle is required to obtain sufficient clearance.
Two general types of rotor hubs are rigid and teetered.
In a typical rigid hub, each blade is bolted to the hub and the hub is rigidly attached to the turbine shaft.
The blades are, in effect, cantilevered from the shaft and therefore transmit all of their dynamic loads directly to it.
To reduce this loading on the shaft, a two-bladed HAWT rotor usually has a teetered hub, which is connected to the turbine shaft through a pivot called a teeter hinge, as shown in Figure 2.5(a).
Teeter motion is a passive means for balancing air loads on the two blades, by cyclically increasing the lift force on one while decreasing it on the other.
18     87  Figure 4.11 Effect of number of blades on peak performance of optimum wind turbines  Figure 4.12 Effect of Drag/Lift ratios on peak performance of an optimum three-bladed wind turbine  88  Figure 4.13 Effect of drag and tip losses on relative wind angle for optimum design  Figure 4.14 Relative wind angles for optimum performance of three-bladed wind turbines  89  Figure 4.15 Blade chord-length distributions for optimum performance of three-bladed wind turbines  Figure 4.16 Twist angle distributions for modified chord-length of the designed blade  90  Figure 4.17 Chord-length distribution of a modified blade for different tip-speed ratio  Figure 4.18 Twist distributions for modified blade of the designed blade  91  Figure 4.19 Distribution of angle of attack for modified twist of the designed blade  Figure 4.20 Distribution of angle of attack for modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade  92  Figure 4.21 Comparison of power coefficients of modified blades with the designed blade  Figure 4.22 Radial thrust coefficient variation of the designed blade  93  Figure 4.23 Radial thrust coefficient for modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade  Figure 4.24 Working range of the designed blade designed at λ = 10  94  Figure 4.25 Working range of modified twist and chord-length of the designed blade designed at λ = 10  Figure 4.26 Effect of Reynolds number on peak performance of an optimum three-bladed turbine  95  Figure 4.27 Views of blade elements from root towards tip for the designed blade  Figure 4.28 Views of blade elements from root towards tip for the modified blade  96  Figure 4.29 Isometric views of the blade elements for the designed blade  Figure 4.30 Isometric views of the blade elements for the modified blade  97  Figure 4.31 Three-dimensional solid model of the designed blade  98  Figure 4.32 Three-dimensional solid model of the modified blade  99  Table 4.2 Power Production of a fixed rotational three-bladed HAWT (Airfoil: NACA-4412, Designed at P=50 kW, U∞=8 m/s) U∞(m/s) 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 Power Production (kW) Designed Blade Modified Blade (Ω=76 rpm) (Ω=59 rpm) 21 50 97 166 260 381 532 10 50 78 105 136 163 195  100  CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER PROGRAM FOR BLADE DESIGN 1.2 INTRODUCTION The computer programs XFOILP4 and MATLAB are utilized during the study of this thesis.
This chapter focuses on these programs, results from the programs and their applications in computer-aided design of horizontal-axis wind turbine blades.
XFOIL is firstly introduced by giving its capabilities on the analysis of an existing airfoil, design and redesign of new airfoil geometric parameters.
Since the aerodynamic characteristics of an airfoil should be known numerically before designing a blade and all the information and experimental results performed on airfoils were given graphically in literature, XFOIL is very well fitted for obtaining lift coefficient and drag coefficient data with respect to angle of attack.
In this thesis only the function of this program related to the viscous analysis of existing airfoils has been used.
The required data are obtained from the program by performing on various existing airfoil types and used for the subsequent studies of blade design.
The procedure to obtain the data is described and the results of the program are also compared with the results given in literature to show that the program XFOIL gives fairly close values.
User-interface computer program, BLADESIGN written by using MATLAB is then described.
General view and working flow chart of the program are presented with the explanation of important properties and capabilities of the program.
All the commands and their functions in the program are also introduced for the users of this program.
Lastly sample blade design studies are given by specifying a set of input values.
According to these input values, the program is executed and the  101  corresponding outputs are illustrated in tabulated form and also compared with CP & λ, c/R & r/R and θ & r/R figures for both designed and modified blades.
1.2 XFOILP4 XFOIL is an interactive program for the design and analysis of subsonic isolated airfoils.
It consists of a collection of menu-driven routines which perform various useful functions such as: − Viscous (or incviscid) analysis of an existing airfoil, allowing • Forced or free transition • Transitional separation bubbles • Limited trailing edge separation • Lift and drag predictions just beyond maximum lift coefficient • Karman-Tsien compressibility correction − Airfoil design and redesign by interactive specification of a surface speed  distribution via screen cursor or mouse.
Two such facilities are implemented: • Full-Inverse, based on a complex-mapping formulation • Mixed-Inverse, allowing relatively − as: • New max.
thickness and/or camber • New LE (leading edge) radius • New TE (trailing edge) thickness Airfoil redesign by interactive specification of new geometric parameters such  102  • New camberline via geometry specification • New camberline via loading change specification • Explicit contour geometry (via screen cursor) − − − Drag polar calculation with fixed or varying Reynolds and/or Mach number Writing and reading of airfoil geometry and polar save files Plotting of geometry, pressure distribution and polars XFOIL was written by Mark Drela in 1986 with the name XFOIL 1.0 and after undergoing numerous revisions, upgrades and enhancements it becomes now strongly geared to practical airfoil development with its final revision name XFOILP4.
Further explanation about the use of XFOIL program can be found in reference [26], here only the part of XFOIL program which was extensively used for the development of blade design program will be described.
If it is remembered from the airfoil selection criteria in section 4.4, the design angle of attack should be selected such that the glide ratio is minimum at that value of angle of attack.
Therefore the variation of lift coefficients and drag coefficients of an airfoil with respect to angle of attack in the fully-attached regime are required.
XFOIL gives these data in a considerably excellent agreement with published polars as shown in Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 for the airfoil NACA 4412 as an example.
The results of XFOIL has been compared with the reference polar data performed by Abbott and Von Doenhoff [27] and also from the reference Riegels [28] to see the validity of XFOIL results.
103  Figure 5.1 Comparison of XFOIL lift coefficient data with data in reference [28]  Figure 5.2 Comparison of XFOIL drag coefficient data with data in reference [28]     84  The radial variation in relative wind angle ϕ for different design conditions is shown in Figure 4.13.
The angle ϕ is high at all radial sections for the low design tip-speed ratio.
The increase in drag marginally reduces the angle ϕ .
The reduction in the number of blades reduces the relative wind angle at the low design tip-speed ratio, but the effect of number of blades is negligible at the high values of design tip-speed ratio.
In this study the modification of the designed blade shape has also been determined.
The modification of chord-length keeping the twist distribution same with that of designed blade, the modification of twist distribution keeping the chord-length distribution same with that of designed blade and modification of both have been separately determined and their performance have been compared.
The variations in twist angle and chord-length along the blade for different tipspeed ratios are shown in Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15.
In Figure 4.16 and Figure 4.17, the variations in twist angle and chord-length for different tip-speed ratios are given after modifying the chord-length distribution of the designed blade.
Figure 4.18 shows the variations in modified twist along the blade length for different tip-speed ratios and the variation of angle of attack along the blade length for this blade whose twist distribution has been modified is shown in Figure 4.19 together with the design angle of attack and stall angle for considered airfoil.
Figure 4.20 shows the variation in angle of attack along the blade length for a designed blade whose both chord-length and twist distributions have been modified.
In Figure 4.21 power coefficients of modified blades are compared with that of designed blade.
It can be seen from these figures that the design power coefficient of modified blade, which is attained after modification of the designed blade performed in this thesis, is fairly close to the design power coefficient of the designed bade at different design tip-peed ratio.
Moreover, since the power  85  coefficient is directly proportional to the lift forces acting on the blade, modification of the designed blade causes the lift forces acting on the modified blade to decrease with regard to the lift forces acting on the designed blade preventing the blade from loading highly during its operation.
Radial thrust coefficient which is a measure of loading of rotor in the wind direction has also been calculated for the designed and the modified blade and shown in Figure 4.22 and Figure 4.23.
Again thrust force is also decreased for the modified blade as to the thrust force for the designed blade.
Off-design conditions of turbines have been taken into consideration and regarding the cut-in and cut-out speed, the working range of a fixed-rotational speed turbine has been determined separately for the designed blade and the modified blade.
As shown in Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.25 the working range of modified blade is drastically reduced with regard to that of designed blade.
The performance of a HAWT rotor during its operation at different average wind velocities is also studied.
In this study three-bladed HAWT rotor is designed for the required power production 50 kW and at the design wind velocity 8 m/s.
For these conditions the rotational velocity of the rotor becomes 76 rpm in case of using designed blade and 59 rpm for the modified blade.
And for different average wind velocities, corresponding power production of this three-bladed HAWT is obtained as shown on Table 4.2.
Since the power production is proportional with the cube of the average wind velocity (equation 2.5.1) and the power coefficient of the designed blade is nearly constant over a wide range of tip-speed ratio as illustrated in Figure 4.21, power production of HAWT rotor made up from the designed blades is gradually increasing as the average wind velocity increases.
Power production of a HAWT rotor made up from the modified blades, however, is not increasing very much as expected when its power coefficient variation with respect to tip-speed ratio shown on Figure 4.21 is analyzed.
86  The effect of Reynolds number on power performance of wind turbines has been studied.
Since two-dimensional airfoil characteristics depends on the Reynolds number, there should be effect on the power of turbines but as shown in Figure 4.26 it is not significant as expected.
In Figure 4.27 and Figure 4.28, the views of blade elements of NACA 4412 airfoil for the designed and its modified blade are shown.
As it can be seen from these figures, twist distribution of modified blade becomes smoother than that of designed blade.
Figure 4.29 and Figure 4.30 show the blade elements of NACA 4412 in isometric view for the designed and modified blade.
Note that the modification of the designed blade makes chord-length of some blade elements near the root bigger than that of designed blade but the variation of chord-length from root towards tip becomes linear for the modified blade as to the sharp variation for the designed blade.
Lastly, three-dimensional views of the designed and modified blade made from the airfoil NACA 4412 are illustrated in Figure 4.31 and Figure 4.32 for visualization.Teetering also reduces the cyclic loads imposed by a two-bladed rotor on the turbine shaft to levels well below those caused by two blades on a rigid hub.
A three-bladed rotor has usually a rigid hub.
In this case, cyclic loads on the turbine shaft are much smaller than those produced by a two-bladed rotor with a rigid hub, because three or more blades form a dynamically symmetrical rotor: one with the same mass moment of inertia about any axis in the plane of the rotor and passing through the hub.
A wide variety of materials have been used successfully for HAWT rotor blades, including glass-fiber composites, laminated wood composites, steel spars with non-structural composite fairings and welded steel foils.
Whatever the blade material, HAWT rotor hubs are almost always fabricated from steel forgings, castings or weldments.
2.3.2 THE POWER-TRAIN SUBSYSTEM: The power train of a wind turbine consists of the series of mechanical and electrical components required to convert the mechanical power received from the rotor hub to electrical power.
A typical HAWT power train consists of a turbine shaft assembly (also called a primary shaft), a speed increasing gearbox, a generator drive shaft (also called a secondary shaft), rotor brake and an electrical generator, plus auxiliary equipment for control, lubrication and cooling functions.
2.3.3 THE NACELLE STRUCTURE SUBSYSTEM: The HAWT nacelle structure is the primary load path from the turbine shaft to the tower.
Nacelle structures are usually a combination of welded and bolted steel sections.
Stiffness and static strength are the usual design drivers of nacelle structures.
2.3.4 THE TOWER SUBSYSTEM AND THE FOUNDATION: A HAWT tower raises the rotor and power train to the specified hub elevation, the distance from the ground to the center of the swept area.
The stiffness of a tower is a major factor in wind turbine system dynamics because of the possibility of coupled vibrations between the rotor and tower.
Located in the ground equipment station  19  are those components which are necessary for properly interfacing the HAWT with the electric utility or other distribution system.
2.3.5 THE CONTROLS: The control system for a wind turbine is important with respect to both machine operation and power production.
Wind turbine control involves the following three major aspects and the judicious balancing of their requirements [2]: • Setting upper bounds on and limiting the torque and power experienced by the drive train • Maximizing the fatigue life of the rotor drive train and other structural components in the presence of changes in the wind direction, speed, as well as start-stop cycles of the wind turbine • Maximizing the energy production 2.3.6 THE BALANCE OF ELECTRICAL SUBSYSTEM: In addition to the generator, the wind turbine utilizes a number of other electrical components.
Some examples are cables, switchgear, transformers and power electronic converters, yaw and pitch motors.
2.4 AERODYNAMIC CONTROLS OF HAWTS Horizontal-axis wind turbines use different types of aerodynamic control to achieve peak power and optimum performance control.
Nearly all turbines use an induction or synchronous generator interconnected with the utility grid.
These generators maintain a constant rotor speed during normal operation, so aerodynamic control is needed only to limit and optimize power output.
Variable speed control has been considered as a means of improving the aerodynamic efficiency of the rotor and reducing dynamic loads.
This type of control results in the rotor speed changing to maintain a constant ratio between blade tip speed and wind speed (tip speed ratio).
20  Medium and large-scale HAWT rotors usually contain a mechanism for adjusting blade pitch, which is the angle between the blade chordline and the plane of rotation.
This pitch-change mechanism, which may control the angle of the entire blade (full-span pitch control) or only that of an outboard section (partialspan pitch control), provides a means of controlling starting torque, peak power, and stopping torque.
Peak power is controlled by adjusting blade pitch angle to progressively lower angles of attack to control increasing wind loading.
Pitch control offers the advantage of more positive power control, decreasing thrust loads as blades pitch toward feather in high winds and low parked rotor loads while the turbine is not operating in extreme winds.
One disadvantage of pitch control is the lack of peak power control during turbulent wind conditions.
Some HAWTs have fixed-pitch stall-controlled blades, avoiding the cost and maintenance of pitch-change mechanisms by relying on aerodynamic stall to limit peak power.
Passive power regulation is achieved by allowing the airfoils to stall.
As wind speed increases stall progresses outboard along the span of the blade causing decreased lift and increased drag.
One disadvantage of stall-controlled rotors is that they must withstand steadily increasing thrust loads with increasing wind speed because drag loads continue to increase as the blade stalls.
Another disadvantage is the difficulty of predicting aerodynamic loads in deep stall.
In addition to partial-span and full-span pitch control, several types of aerodynamic brakes have been used for stall-controlled rotors.
A simplified form of aerodynamic control mechanism is a tip brake or tip vane, in which a short outboard section of each blade is turned at right angles to the direction of motion, stopping the rotor by aerodynamic drag or at least limiting its speed.
Pitchable tips and pivoting tip vane have been used with reasonable success.
A yaw drive mechanism is also required so that the nacelle can turn to keep the rotor shaft properly aligned with the wind.
An active yaw drive (one which turns the nacelle to a specified azimuth) contains one or two motors (electric or hydraulic), each of which drives a pinion gear against a bull gear and an automatic  21  yaw control system with its wind direction sensor mounted on the nacelle.
A  passive yaw drive permits wind forces to orient the nacelle.
2.5 PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF HAWTS The power performance parameters of a HAWT can be expressed in dimensionless form, in which the power coefficients, C p and the tip-speed ratio, λ are used.
These are given in equation 2.5.1 and 2.5.2 respectively;  Cp =  P 3 1/ 2 ρU ∞π R 2  (2.5.1)  λ=  ΩR U∞  (2.5.2)  Note that in equation 2.5.2, tip-speed ratio is defined for a fixed wind speed.
A sample C p & λ curve is given in Figure 2.6 for a typical HAWT operating at fixed pitch.
Figure 2.6 Typical plot of rotor power coefficient vs. tip-speed ratio for HAWT with a fixed blade pitch angle  22  To give a few comments on the operating points A, B, C and D shown in Figure 2.6 will help reading such C p & λ curves of HAWTs.
The left-hand side of Figure 2.6 following the path ABC is controlled by blade stall.
Local angles of attack (angles between the relative wind angle and the blade chordline) are relatively large as point A is approached.
The right-hand side of the same figure following the path CD is controlled by drag, particularly 'skin friction' because the angles of attack are small as point D is approached.
At fixed pitch maximum power occurs in the stall region when the lift coefficient is near its peak value over much of the blade.
Apart from the power coefficient, the thrust coefficient ,which will be used as well in the subsequent chapters for characterizing the different flow states of a rotor is defined as;  CT =  T 2 1/ 2 ρU ∞π R 2  (2.5.3)  2.6 CLASSIFICATION OF HAWTS Because the interconnection of wind turbines to utilities becomes their principal application, the average size of HAWTs has grown.
The question of 'size  classification' has been raised, as well.
HAWTs are classified as shown in Table 2.1 according to their diameters and/or their rated powers [1].
Table 2.1 Scale classification of wind turbines [1]  Scale Small Medium Large  Rotor Diameter Less than 12 m 12 m to 45 m 46 m and larger  Power Rating Less than 40kW 40kW to 999kW 1.0 MW and larger  23  In Figure 2.7 scales of HAWTs are given for the prescribed rated capacity to provide better understanding the relation between the rated capacity of a HAWT with its rotor diameter and tower height.
Figure 2.7 Representative size, height and diameter of HAWTs [2]  2.7 CRITERIA IN HAWT DESIGN Before ending this chapter, a few words to be mentioned in ref [8] about the criteria in HAWT design and construction include:  • Number of turbine blades • Rotor orientation; downwind or upwind rotor • Turbine torque regulation • Turbine speed; fixed or variable rotor speed • Blade material, construction method and profile (airfoil section)  24  • Hub design; rigid, teetering or hinged • Power control via aerodynamic control (stall control) or variable pitch blades (pitch control)  • Orientation by self aligning action (free yaw) or direct control (active yaw) • Types of mechanical transmission and generator; synchronous or induction generator; gearbox or direct drive transmission  • Type of tower; steel or reinforced -concrete shell or steel truss with tension cables  25 JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 1  JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS Version 01.1 - in effect as of: 27 October 2006  CONTENTS A.
B. C. D. E. F. G. General description of the small-scale project Baseline Duration of the small-scale project / crediting period Monitoring plan Estimation of greenhouse gas emission reductions Environmental impacts Stakeholders' comments Annexes Annex 1: Contact information on project participants  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 2  SECTION A.
General description of the small-scale project A.1.
Title of the small-scale project:  Sudenai and Lendimai Wind Power Joint Implementation Project Ver.
no.
6, Nov. 6 2007 A.2.
Description of the small-scale project:  The objective of the JI project is to establish two wind power plants with a combined capacity of 14 MW at Sudenu and Lendimu villages in Lithuania (JI Project).
The renewable electricity produced by the wind power plants will displace carbon intensive electricity produced from fossil fuel sources in the Lithuanian power network, thus contributing to the lowering of greenhouse gas emissions as well as other pollutants related to fossil fuel based power generation.
Lithuania has undertaken to increase the share of renewable electricity from current 3,5% to 7% by year 2010.
To comply with this undertaking Lithuania would need to achieve ca.
480 GWh electricity production only from wind energy.
This would amount to ca.
200 MW of installed wind power capacity.
The recently approved National Program of Increasing Efficiency of Energy Consumption for 2006-2010 states that potential of usage of renewable sector to produce electricity is growing 0.2-1% annually; wind energy is first priority, biomass energy second.
In order to give incentives for business of wind energy parks, the government has issued legislation1 regulating the obligatory purchase of wind power electricity.
The feed-in tariff is set to 0,22 LTL per kWh i.e.
6,37 EUR cents per kWh (1 EUR = 3,4528 LTL).
Such a feed-in tariff is expected to remain until 2020 year.
In order to obtain the mentioned feed-in tariff the wind power plant must be built in one of the six zones for which tenders for grid connection are organised by Lietuvos Energija AB - the electricity Transmission System Operator in Lithuania.
The set feed-in tariff is unfortunately not sufficient to realize the proposed project on a commercial basis.
Additional income from the sale of 'carbon credits' under the Kyoto Joint Implementation scheme is thus required to turn the project attractive for the investors.
Procedure of Promoting Generation and Purchase of Electricity Produced by Using Renewable and Spare Energy Resources.
Resolution No.
1474 of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania on approval of regulations enacting the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Electricity, dated 5 December 2001.
Resolution No.
7 of the State Commission for Control on Prices and Energy regarding prices of public interest services in the electricity sector, dated 11 February 2002.
1  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 3  A.3.
Project participants: Party involved  Legal entity project participant (as applicable) • • Vejo Elektra UAB Nordic Environment Finance Corporation (NEFCO) in its capacity as Fund Manager to the Baltic Sea Region Testing Ground Facility (TGF)  Republic of Lithuania (host Party) One of the investor countries participating in the TGF, tbc.
The investor countries in the TGF are: Kingdom of Denmark, Republic of Finland, Federal Republic of Germany, Republic of Iceland, Kingdom of Norway and Kingdom of Sweden.
Please indicate if the Party involved wishes to be considered as project participant (Yes/No) No No  NEFCO, the Nordic Environment Finance Corporation, is a multilateral risk capital institution financing environmental projects in Central and Eastern Europe, increasingly with an emphasis on the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Its purpose is to facilitate the implementation of environmentally beneficial projects in the neighbouring region, with transboundary effects that also benefit the Nordic region.
Today, NEFCO manages funds in an aggregate of approximately €300 million.
NEFCO is located in Helsinki, in conjunction with the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB).
The Baltic Sea Region Testing Ground Facility (TGF) was established at the end of December 2003, to provide financial assistance to concrete projects by purchasing emission reduction credits.
The TGF was initially set up by the governments of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
The TGF is now a Public Private Partnership which acts as a compliance vehicle for its investors' Kyoto and EU Emissions Trading Scheme commitments.
From June 2006, it includes the following Nordic and German companies from the energy sector as well as energy intensive industrial consumers: DONG Naturgas A/S (Denmark), Fortum Power and Heat Oy (Finland), Gasum Oy (Finland), Keravan Energia Oy (Finland), Kymppivoima Tuotanto Oy (Finland), Outokumpu Oyj (Finland), Vapo Oy (Finland), Vattenfall Europe Berlin AG & Co. KG (Germany) and Vattenfall Europe Generation AG & Co. KG (Germany).
The TGF is currently capitalised at €35 million.
NEFCO is the Fund Manager of the TGF, and has been authorised by the governments investing in the TGF to participate on their behalf in actions leading to the generation, transfer and acquisition of ERUs under Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 4  A.4.
Technical description of the small-scale project: A.4.1.
Location of the small-scale project:  A.4.1.1.
Host Party(ies): Republic of Lithuania A.4.1.2.
Region/State/Province etc.
: Kretingos A.4.1.3.
City/Town/Community etc.
: Sudenu and Lendimu villages A.4.1.4.
Detail of physical location, including information allowing the unique identification of the small-scale project: The proposed JI project would be located in Kretingos county, Sudenu village (Sudenai 8 MW wind power plant) and Lendimu village (Lendimai 6 MW wind power plant).
The parks are located approx.
10 km from Baltic Sea on natural hills reaching up to 30m above the sea level and open to winds of all directions.
The land plots are located in the midst of a rural area and are unsuitable for residential development.
Dominant winds (SW) form two tunnels in the valleys of Sventoji river and Kulse rivulet.
110 kV Sventoji-Zidikai high voltage line crosses the plots.
The sites meet other prerequisites for successful wind power generation - nearby technical infrastructure (grid, roads, port) and no environmental or other restrictions.
The size of the development lots are 27.65 ha in Sudenai village and 11 ha in Lendimai village.
The local inhabitants have signed their acceptances for the projects.
Figure 1.
Location map  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 5  Figure 2.
Location of the project in relation to the national electricity grid  Figure 3.
Location of the project  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 6  Figure 4.
Location of the project  Figure 5.
Detailed plan of UAB Lariteksas wind farm (Land unit of 27.65 ha, at Sudenai village, cadastre No.
5667/0003:0007)  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 7  cadastre No.
5667/0001:3 Senosios pilties k.v)  7.8 ha, at Lendimai village,  !"
# % $ ' ( ) * +, , .
,/ % &0 (  &  "  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 8  A.4.2.
Small-scale project type(s) and category(ies): Type I JI SSC project: Renewable energy project with a maximum output capacity of less than 15 MW(e).
A.4.3.
Technology(ies) to be employed, or measures, operations or actions to be implemented by the small-scale project: The purpose of the project is the development, construction and operation of two wind power plants in Lithuania.
The power generation of these wind farms will displace carbon-intensive generation from the Lithuanian power plants.
Technology The project will employ state of the art wind turbine technology from one of the world's foremost equipment suppliers, Enercon.
The supplier was selected on the ground of earlier experience from other wind power projects.
The wind power plants will consist of 7 turbines of type E82 with nominal electric capacity of 2000 kW each.
The E82 wind energy converters will have a 78 m hub height steel towers and a 82m rotor diameter.
For further information on the technology and the supplier please visit www.enercon.de.
The project will employ state of the art wind turbine technology from one of the world's foremost equipment suppliers, Enercon.
The wind power plants will consist of 7 turbines of type E82 with nominal electric capacity of 2000 kW each.
The E82 wind energy converters will have a 78 m hub height steel towers and a 82m rotor diameter.
Further information about the turbine is in the table below.
Technical data of Enercon E-82-1 wind turbine.
Power of generator, P 2000 kW Voltage of generator 400 V Type of generator Enercon direct drive synchronous annular generator Grid feeding Enercon inverter, converter Number of blades 3 Blade material GRP (epoxy); integrated lightning protection Rotor type Upwind rotor Direction of rotation Clockwise Rotor diameter 82 m Blade length 38,8 m Swept area 5281 m2 Turbine concept Gearless, variable single blade pitch control, variable speed Rotational speed Variable, 6- 21.5 rpm Cut-in wind speed 2,5 m/s Rated power at 11,5 m/s Cut- out wind speed 24- 34 m/s (with Enercon storm control) Hub height 78 m Braking system - 3 independent blade pitch systems with emergency supply; - Rotor brake;  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 9  - Rotor lock; The technology risks are judged to be low given the maturity of wind turbine technology, and the immense operating experience of the supplier.
Any residual risks will be covered through the performance guarantees and operating warrantees of the supply agreement.
Wind turbine risks are low for modern equipment, but include the risk of critical component failure (e.g.
gearbox, bearings, blades).
As the equipment identified has fewer moving parts (i.e.
synchronous movement, no gears) these risks are inherently reduced.
The expected technical lifetime of the wind turbines is 20 years.
Milestones, time schedule and current status of implementation The project is currently in the advanced development phase with feasibility analysis completed and with the detailed technical design under elaboration.
Project financing (dependant also on securing carbon financing) is under completion with a view to wind farm erection during quarters 2-3 2008 and commissioning by August 2008.
Emission reductions would thus begin to be generated from 1st of September 2008.
Key permits and contracts Besides the low feed-in tariff, the main development barrier to wind projects in Lithuania is the securing of grid connection rights and planning permits.
This barrier has been effectively removed for this project.
Before take-over of the development rights for the Project by September 2006, Lariteksas UAB and Vejo Elektra UAB won a tender for grid connection in June 2004 and received permissions from the Ministry of Economy for development of the wind farms for Lariteksas UAB in July 2005 and for Vejo Elektra UAB in September 2004.
The latter permission has been extended in March 2007.
The grid connection fees have already been paid.
According to the agreement between UAB "V jo elektra" UAB "Lariteksas" and AB "Lietuvos energija", dated August 2006, the connecting electricity line (including any other necessary equipment) located in the parcels of land of UAB "V jo elektra" and UAB "Lariteksas" shall be installed by the companies themselves in compliance with the technical project approved by AB "Lietuvos energija".
The agreement prescribes that requirements for the supply of electricity into the electricity network of AB "Lietuvos energija", such as quality, quantity, timetables, accounting, readings, software, etc., shall be unilaterally set by AB "Lietuvos energija".
UAB "V jo elektra" and UAB "Lariteksas" may not exceed the power of electricity production prescribed to them.
In case of failure to comply with this obligation, AB "Lietuvos energija" may limit or terminate the supply of electricity into its electricity network.
The local Kretingos municipality has agreed to the establishment of the wind farms and approved the respective detailed land use plan in June 2006.
The project detailed technical design will be completed by summer 2007 on basis of which the building permit can be obtained.
Also an environmental impact assessment has been carried out and approved by the respective authorities.
The land has been rented to the project companies on a long-term basis.
The Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for the project has not yet been signed but is a formality under Lithuanian law once the grid connection rights have been secured.
The PPA will be secured by Q3, 2008.
The turn-key contract has already been agreed with the equipment supplier Enercon.
Local civil construction companies will be sub-contracted for construction of project infrastructure.
Operation of the  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 10  wind farms will be taken care of by 4Energy and Enercon will take care of technical maintenance of during the first two years .
Risks during project implementation and operation Construction cost overrun risk is transferred to the turnkey supplier by the terms of the supply contract.
This includes total project management, including foundation construction and all civil engineering work.
Enercon will be responsible for installation and operation during the trial period.
Technology risks during construction and commissioning are similarly covered by the terms of the supply agreement.
The contract includes a two year warranty period which includes maintenance, consumables and spare parts, valid from the takeover certificate (at successful commissioning).
Risk is further reduced as the technology supplier is an established and creditworthy company.
Delivery risks during operation relate to operation of the wind power plant.
These include risks related to high wind, freak conditions, fire and lightning and vessel collision.
These will be minimised by employing best practice procedures.
The remaining risks will be assumed with the purchase of insurance products, incl.
business interruption insurance.
The energy yield estimate was calculated by EMD International A/S using measurements from a meteorological mast located on the site with 23-month measurement period.
The dataset was correlated with model data from NCAR/NCEP re-analysis data from 1975-2007 (32 years).
The measured data was corrected to long-term level using NCAR/NCEP data and the wind energy index method.
As the result of analysis the combined annual production capacity of the wind farms is estimated to be 28.988 MWh.
The estimate has a 90% probability of occurrence (P90) and can thus be considered very conservative.
Figure 8.
Energy yield assessment map by EMD International A/S  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 11  Market risks relate to the uncertainties of power tariffs and the purchaser's ability to pay.
These are covered through the PPA, which is required by law, with recourse to a creditworthy counterparty, AB Lietuvos Energia, the national power company.
The company operates in an EU business environment, with low levels of business and regulatory risk.
There remains however the risk of possible change of the feed-in tariff under the legislation.
There is also an uncertainty related to the expected sales price of power after the end of the obligatory purchase period in 2020.
A.4.4.
Brief explanation of how the anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases by sources are to be reduced by the proposed small-scale project, including why the emission reductions would not occur in the absence of the proposed small-scale project, taking into account national and/or sectoral policies and circumstances: The renewable electricity produced by the proposed wind power plants would displace carbon intensive electricity produced from fossil fuel sources in the Lithuanian power network.
Lithuanian electric power network is being operated by AB Lietuvos Energija.
Foremost, they purchase power quotas (on basis of the prior signed contracts) from electric power producers.
The producers may also supply electric power, exceeding the quotas, at a lower price.
The difference in national demand for the electric power and total production thereof (quotas and over-quotas) is being covered by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
Thus, if the implementation of this JI Project fails, the estimated electric power would be produced by AB Lietuvos Elektrine using fossil fuels - natural gas, heavy fuel oil and orimulsion.
It was calculated that AB Lietuvos Elektrine, by generating 1 MWh of electric power, contributes to the pollution of atmosphere with 0.629 tonnes of CO2 (data of 2002-2005).2 See chapter B.1.
for more details of baseline calculation and next chapter for estimation of the GHG emission reductions of the JI Project which have been calculated conservatively on basis of the above carbon emission factor of 0.629 tCO2e/MWh and the expected power production.
The proposed JI Project supports Lithuania's objective to increase the share of renewable electricity from current ca.
3,5% to 7% by year 2010.
To comply with this undertaking Lithuania would need to achieve 480 GWh electricity production only from wind energy.
This would amount to ca.
200 MW of installed wind power capacity.
The Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Energy3 points out promotion of consumption of renewable energy resources as one of the principal objectives of regulation of state energy sector activities.
The law provides that the state encourages the producers to generate electricity from renewable energy sources by imposing the "must carry" obligations.
The Rules for Imposing the Public Interest Service Obligations4 provide that supply licence holders are under the obligation to buy up electricity generated by producers (connected to the transmission system) by using renewable and spare energy resources, and to sell it to their customers.
In order to provide incentives for wind power development the government has issued legislation regulating obligatory purchase of wind power at a price of 0,22 LTL per kWh (6,37 EUR).
Such a feed-in tariff is expected to remain until year 2020.
In order to obtain the mentioned feed-in tariff the wind power plant must be built in one of the six zones for which tenders for grid connection are organised by Lietuvos Energija AB - the electricity Transmission System Operator in Lithuania.
JI PDD of Rudaiciai Wind Power Park, December 2006, ver.
PDD 01, p.7 Law No.
IX-884 of the Republic of Lithuania on Energy, dated 16 May 2002.
4 Order No.
380 of the Minister of Economy of the Republic of Lithuania on approval of regulations enacting the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on Electricity, dated 18 December 2001.
3  2  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 12  The above feed-in tariff for wind power is unfortunately not sufficient for commercial development of the wind power sector.
Thus all recent wind power developments (e.g.
Rudaiciai wind power plant of UAB Veju Spektras and Benaiciai wind power plant of UAB Achema Hidrostotys) are being carried out under the JI scheme.
A recent report of the European Commission concludes for Lithuania that the progress up to now to increase the share of renewable electricity has been modest: "Amendments made in 2005 to the RES-E support system must lead to tangible results soon in order to reach the 2010 target of 7%".5 It is thus very unlikely that future project will proceed without further financial interventions from the Joint Implementation scheme.
For further information about the project's additionality please see section B.2.
A.4.4.1.
Estimated amount of emission reductions over the crediting period: Length of the crediting period 4 years, 4 months Year Estimate of annual emission reductions in tonnes of CO2 equivalent Year 2008 6.078 Year 2009 18.233 Year 2010 18.233 Year 2011 18.233 Year 2012 18.233 Total estimated emission reductions over the 79.012 crediting period (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) Annual average of estimated emission reductions 15.802 over the crediting period (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) A.4.5 Confirmation that the proposed small-scale project is not a debundled component of a larger project: The Sudenai and Lendimai Wind Power JI Project with a combined capacity of 14.0 MW(e) is not a debundled component of a larger project due to the following reasons: - The project boundaries of the nearest wind power development project (developed by UAB Achemos Hidrostotys) is located at a minimum distance of 3 km from the project boundary of the proposed JI Project (at the closest point).
- The project participants of the closest wind power development project are different.
Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament.
Green Paper follow-up action.
Report on progress in renewable electricity.
Brussels, 10.1.2007, p.8  5  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 13  A.5.
Project approval by the Parties involved:  Written approval by the Host Party involved, including the necessary authorisations, will be attached to the final PDD.
The proposed JI Project has already been endorsed the Ministry of Environment with its communication from February 21 2007 "Concerning the approval of the Idea of Joint Implementation Project", Document no.
(10-5)-D8-1543.
Once the draft determination report is available, the necessary request to issue a host country Letter of Approval will be made to the relevant Lithuanian authorities.
The investor country approval will be issued by at least one of the investor countries to the TGF at the point in time when it is required, at the latest.
Currently the investor country approval according to the JI Supervisory Committee decision is needed when submitting the first verification report for publication.
SECTION B. Baseline B.1.
Description and justification of the baseline chosen:  The baseline is the amount of GHG that would be emitted to the atmosphere during the crediting period of the project, i.e.
in 2008-2012, in case the project was not implemented.
BASREC Regional Handbook on Procedures for Joint Implementation in the Baltic Sea Region (Version 2 - June 2006) indicates three methods of baseline approach: 1.
Existing actual or historical greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, as applicable; 2.
Emissions from a technology that represents an economically attractive course of action, taking into account barriers to investment; 3.
Average emissions of similar projects undertaken in the previous 5 years, in similar social, environmental and technological circumstances, and whose performance is in the top 20 per cent of their category.
The baseline is calculated referring to historic data as this method is best suited for Lithuanian power market.
Approved CDM ACM0002 methodology is not used for the baseline calculation due to the following reasons: 1.
Lietuvos Elektrine, power plant with the second largest installed capacity in Lithuania (after Ignalina nuclear power plant -INPP) is operating on the power grid as a marginal plant.
It covers all power demand which is remaining after all other power producers have supplied their quota power to the grid.
Hence, by simply including all these power plants operating on the grid (excl.
INPP) would bias the Operating Margin emissions factor.
2.
There is an overcapacity of installed power in Lithuania, so only very few new power plants are built.
Because of that, it is impossible to calculate properly the Build Margin emissions factor.
Taking into consideration the specifics of the Lithuanian power market, the methodology based on historical data was developed in mid 2006 by a consulting company Ekostrategija.
The methodology is described below and was also used when developing the JI project of Rudaiciai Wind Power Park.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 14  GHG emissions from production of electric power depend on type of fuel used and the efficiency of installations in which fuel is combusted.
Thus, for baseline calculation it is important to know which power plants will reduce production due to the supply of additional electric power, generated in a JI project.
This can be easily determined knowing the structure of Lithuanian power network.
When the manufacturers of electric power supply all quota power to integrated Lithuanian power grid, the rest of power demand is covered by power produced in Lietuvos elektrine (Lithuanian Power Plant).
Taking this into consideration, we can say that in case of additional power supply to the grid, the production will be reduced in Lietuvos elektrine.
Therefore, in order to calculate GHG emission reductions, resulting from implementation of JI projects related to production of electric power, it is necessary to know the amount of CO2 released to the atmosphere while producing 1 MWh of electric power in Lietuvos elektrine.
For determination of the baseline we use fuel consumption and production efficiency data provided by AB Lietuvos elektrine as well as production of electric and thermal power in Lietuvos elektrine in 2002-2005 (Table 1).
Table 1 Energy production and fuel consumption in Lietuvos elektrine Year Electric power produced (MWh) 736,604 723,858 745,372 1,072,814 Thermal power produced (MWh) 202,060 195,553 212,399 199,383 Natural gas (1000nm3) 199,104 225,813 207,690 280,559 Fuel oil (t) Orimulsion (t)  2002 2003 2004 2005  7,355 5,241 2,750 1,815  52,534 21,238 55,501 86,160  Source: Lietuvos Elektrine, telefax of 06.05.10; Lietuvos Energetika.
Energy in Lithuania 2004.
Lietuvos energetikos institutas, 2005  The amount of fuel consumed is transferred to oil equivalents using such factors: natural gas - 0.800 toe/1000nm3, fuel oil - 0.955 toe/t, orimulsion - 0.660 toe/t (Table 2).6 Table 2 Fuel consumption at Lietuvos elektrine, expressed in oil equivalents Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 Natural gas (toe) 159,289 180,657 166,158 224,455 Fuel oil (toe) 7,025 5,005 2,626 1,733 Orimulsion (toe) 34,675 14,018 36,633 56,869  Hereafter, we calculate the percentage of each type of fuel, being consumed in every year (Table 3).
6  P. 20, Lietuvos Energetika.
Energy in Lithuania 2004.
Lietuvos energetikos institutas, 2005  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 15  Table 3 Proportion of fuels consumed at Lietuvos elektrine Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 Natural gas (%) 79.25% 90.47% 80.89% 79.30% Fuel oil (%) 3.49% 2.51% 1.28% 0.61% Orimulsion (%) 17.25% 7.02% 17.83% 20.09%  According to calorific values of fuel CO2 emission factors are estimated for fuel, expressed in tonnes of oil equivalents (Table 4).
Table 4 CO2 emission factors Natural gas tCO2/nm3 0.00189605 tne/1000 nm3 0.80002867 tCO2/tne 2.369981446 Fuel oil tCO2/t 3.1028478 tne/t 0.955065574 tCO2/tne 3.24883221 Orimulsion tCO2/t 2.22683985 tne/t 0.660041566 tCO2/tne 3.373787295  Source: Statistical Department of Lithuania.
Order on the approval of the methodology for the calculation of the balance of fuel and energy, Annex I.
24.
11.2004,(Official Gazette 2004, No172-6363), National GHG inventory report 2007 of the Republic of Lithuania  Total annual amount of CO2 emitted by Lietuvos Elektrine is calculated by multiplying the amount of each type of fuel consumed annually (expressed in toe) by the corresponding emission factor tCO2/toe (see Table 9).
TCO2 = (FGas x EFGas) + (FHFO x EFHFO) + (FOrm x EFOrm) TCO2 - total annual amount of CO2 emitted by Lietuvos elektrine; FGas - annual consumption of natural gas at Lietuvos elektrine, 1000 m3 FHFO - annual consumption of Heavy Fuel Oil at Lietuvos elektrine, tonnes FOrm - annual consumption of Orimulsion at Lietuvos elektrine, tonnes EFGas - CO2 emission factor for Natural gas, tCO2/toe EFHFO - CO2 emission factor for Heavy fuel oil,, tCO2/toe EFOrm - CO2 emission factor for Orimulsion, tCO2/toe Table 5 shows the emissions from each type of fuel at Lietuvos elektrine.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 16  Table 5 Fuel specific CO2 emissions at Lietuvos elektine Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 Natural gas, tCO2 377,512 428,153 393,791 531,955 Fuel oil, tCO2 22,821 16,262 8,533 5,632 Orimulsion, tCO2 116,985 47,294 123,592 191,865 Total: tCO2 517,318 491,709 525,916 729,451  Amount of CO2 emissions, released while producing thermal power in Lietuvos elektrine, is calculated as follows:  H CO 2 =  H LE ⋅ R% ⋅ K tCO 2 / toe ; E h ⋅ K toe  HCO2 - CO2 emissions, generated while producing thermal power; HLE - Annual amount of thermal power produced; Eh - Efficiency of thermal power production in Lietuvos elektrine (88.1%, see below); Ktoe - Coefficient for transfer of thermal power to conditional fuel (toe - tonnes of oil equivalents).
It is equal to 11.63 (Source: Energy in Lithuania 2004); R% - Percentage of each type of fuel within the annual fuel consumption; KtCO2/toe - Emission factor for one unit of conditional fuel (tne - tonnes of oil equivalents) of different fuel types.
To calculate efficiency of thermal power production in Lietuvos Elektrine, we have considered the data for consumption of conditional fuel per 1 MWh of heat energy produced, presented by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
These figures were obtained by using an internal enterprise's methodology and are presented in Table 5.
Table 5.
Consumption of conditional fuel to produce 1 MWh of heat energy at Lietuvos elektrine Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 tce/MWhe 0.136 0.141 0.141 0.140  Source: Lietuvos Elektrine, telefax of 23.06.06 Fuel consumption was transferred to the efficiency of thermal power production (Table 6).
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 17  Table 6.
Efficiency of thermal power production at Lietuvos elektrine Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 Average Efficiency of thermal power production 90.5% 87.1% 87.1% 87.6% 88.1%  As it can be seen from the table, the average thermal power production efficiency rate in "Lietuvos elektrine" is 88.1%.
Based on the above formula, the amount of CO2 emissions released while producing thermal power in Lietuvos elektrine is calculated as following in Table 7.
Table 7.
Emissions attributable to thermal power production at Lietuvos elektrine Natural gas, Fuel oil tCO2 Orimulsion, CO2 emissions (t) tCO2 tCO2 2002 37,041 2,239 11,478 50,759 2003 40,924 1,554 4,520 46,998 2004 39,740 861 12,472 53,073 2005 36,571 387 13,190 50,148  CO2 emissions released for production of electric power are calculated by deducting the amount of CO2 attributable to heat production from the total CO2 amount released by Lietuvos elektrine.
PCO2 = TCO2 - HCO2 PCO2 - annual CO2 emissions attributable to power production at Lietuvos elektrine, tCO2 TCO2 - total annual amount of CO2 emitted by Lietuvos elektrine; HCO2 - annual CO2 emissions attributable to heat production at Lietuvos elektrine, tCO2 To calculate emissions factor, CO2 emissions attributable to power production were divided by annual power production.
The results are presented in Table 8.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 18  Table 8.
Emissions attributable to power production at Lietuvos elektrin Year Power production, Emissions, t CO2 MWh 2002 2003 2004 2005 Average 736,604 723,858 745,372 1,072,814 819,662 466,559 444,711 472,843 679,303 515,854  tCO2/MWhe 0.633 0.614 0.634 0.633 0.629  To evaluate the correctness of the results obtained, we compared them to the results obtained and provided by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
Calculations made by the technicians of AB Lietuvos Elektrine gave such results: 0.667 tCO2/MWhe for 2005 and 0.726 tCO2/MWhe for the period before 2012 forecast.
Considering the results of our calculation and ones presented by AB Lietuvos Elektrine it is possible to draw the conclusion that using emissions factor of 0.629 tCO2/MWhe would represent a conservative approach to the baseline as it would result in fewer CO2 reductions compared to the one calculated by AB Lietuvos Elektrine methodology.
Lithuania's National allocation plan for 2005-2007 forecasts an increase in Orimulsion share from 20% (56.9 Ktoe) in 2005 to 40% by 2008 in the fuel mix of Lietuvos elektrine.
The forecasted increase in the Orimulsion share, would definitely increase baseline emissions factor.
Hence, the current emissions factor - 0.629 tCO2/MWhe is considered to be conservative and will be used as an ex-ante value to calculate CO2 reductions from Sudenai and Lendimai Wind Power JI Project.
B.2.
Description of how the anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases by sources are reduced below those that would have occurred in the absence of the small-scale project: Additionality of the project is proven using the ver.
2 of the CDM Tool for the Demonstration and Assessment of Additionality as approved by the CDM Executive Board.
Baseline calculation presented in Section B.1 shows that production of an additional 1 MWh of electric power reduces CO2 emissions at average by 0.629 tCO2.
With an estimated annual power production of 28.988 MWh the wind farms of the proposed JI Project would thus reduce CO2 emissions annually by 18.233 tonnes.
Step 0.
Preliminary screening based on the starting date of the project activity Not applicable as a crediting period starts only after the project registration.
Step 1.
Identification of alternatives to the project activity consistent with current laws and regulations Sub-step 1a.
Define alternatives to the project activity:  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 19  A) The proposed project activity not undertaken as a JI project activity; B) Continuation of the current situation (no project activity or other alternatives undertaken); Electric power in the Lithuanian network will be produced in existing and new cogeneration power plants.
Sub-step 1b.
Enforcement of applicable laws and regulations: The existing legal and regulatory requirements in Lithuania is in favour of alternative B - continuation of the current situation and is not in favour of alternative A - proposed project activity not undertaken as a JI project activity.
The obligatory purchase tariff for wind power established by the governmental regulation on promotion of electric power produced from renewable sources7 is not sufficient for commercial development of the wind power sector.
(Sub-step 2c).
Step 2.
Investment analysis Sub-step 2a.
Determine appropriate analysis method Simple cost analysis (option I) is not applicable for the project as the income from sale of 'carbon credits' is not the only source of revenues for the project.
Benchmark analysis (option III) is not applicable either as no investment benchmarks for power sector exist in Lithuania.
The power market in Lithuania is still partly regulated.
Power producers are given quotas to deliver power at a certain price.
Over-quota power is delivered at the market price (lower than the quota price).
Both, quota and the power price differ on a case by case basis.
The investment comparison analysis (option II) will be used for this project as it is the only applicable method.
Sub-step 2b.
- Option II.
Apply investment comparison analysis NPV (Net Present Value) and IRR (Internal Rate of Return), as the most common financial feasibility indicators will be used for investment comparison analysis.
NPV is the difference in the present values of cash outflows and inflows, the higher the NPV, the more attractive the project is for investors; IRR estimates the discount rate used in order to obtain NPV equal to 0.
IRR is commonly calculated on total investment (disregarding capital structure and depreciation rate) to compare the project with similar projects or on the equity part of investment, which is relevant indicator for investors.
Sub-step 2c.
Calculation and comparison of financial indicators Given investor requirements and the risks associated with this project, a higher long-term tariff is required to make the project financially viable if the project is not implemented as a JI project.
7  Lithuanian government's decision No.
1474, Dec. 5 2001  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 20  Financial modelling proves that the financial income from sale of Emission Reduction Units during 200812 improves the IRR of the project by almost one percentage point and enables to generate a positive NPV of the investment, thus making the project attractive for the investors to undertake.
The prepayment from the sale of carbon credits can also be utilized as part of the equity capital.
For financial modelling a less conservative energy yield estimate of 33.708 MWh (as compared to the ERU estimate) has been used as the financial modelling period of 20 years is longer than the ERU generation period (5 years), thus it is more probable that the energy yield will meet the P50 estimate which has a probability of 50%.
An Excel file "Sudenai Lendmai sensitivity" with detailed calculations has been made available to the Independent Entity during determination.
Sub-step 2d.
Sensitivity analysis Power production of the wind farms, ERU price, interest rate and investment cost have been altered to see the effect on projects' profitability.
Sensitivity to change in power production, Sudenai/Lendimai Production, MWh IRR* *Excl.
sale of ERUs -20% 26,966 3.20 % -10% 30,337 4.49 % 0% 33,708 5.63 % +10% 37,079 6.71 % +20% 40,450 7.75 %  Sensitivity to change in ERU price, Sudenai/Lendimai -100% ERU price, EUR IRR* -50% -20% 0% 20% 50%  Confidential - information only available to Independent Entity  *Incl.
sale of ERUs Step 3.
Barrier analysis Sub-step 3a.
Identify barriers that would prevent the implementation of type of the proposed project activity: • One of the key barriers listed in the tool for additionality assessment is, "investment barriers ... Debt funding is not available for this type of innovative project activities."
This is also the case with the proposed JI Project in Lithuania, as neither debt funding would be available if the project did not have JI status.
JI revenue has been considered since the early stages of development of this project and is an integral part of financing the project.
No financial support for renewable electricity generation is foreseen under the EU structural funds or any other multilateral or bilateral sources.
•  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 21  •  Due to the real estate market boom that also affects the designated areas for wind power development in Lithuania (incl.
Kretingos), there is scarcity of land (at reasonable cost) for construction of commercial scale wind power parks Establishment of wind power plants has become more expensive over the past few years due to a change of leading wind turbine suppliers' pricing strategy, increasing price of components and raw materials (steel), and increasing civil construction price in Lithuania.
Tender rules for grid connection in dedicated zones require a significant initial down-payment which the developers are more willing to make when carbon financing is secured or foreseen.
There is insecurity regarding purchase of wind power when trading on hourly basis comes into effect after the establishment of the spot market.
AB "Lietuvos Energija" has the right to disconnect the wind power-plant park from the power network in case of the system overload.
The know-how related to wind power technology and project implementation has been limited in Lithuania.
•  • •  •  Sub-step 3 b.
Show that the identified barriers would not prevent the implementation of at least one of the alternatives (except the proposed project activity): • Fossil fuel based power generation in Lithuania does not face the same limitations on availability of finance and many projects may not even require external funding as they can be financed internally by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
Also EU structural funds are available for new cogeneration power plants and for modernization of existing ones.
There is more know-how available for cogeneration than for wind power in Lithuania.
• •  Step 4.
Common practice analysis Sub-step 4a.
Analyze other activities similar to the proposed project activity: No commercial scale wind farms exist in Lithuania and all new projects are being implemented under the Joint Implementation scheme.
The JI projects would be excluded from the common practice analysis.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 22  Table 9.
Wind power plants developed under the JI scheme Lithuania Title Rudaiciai Wind Power-Plant Project Benaiciu wind power stations park Sudenu and Lendimu power stations park Ciuteliu Wind Power Plant Project Mockiu Wind Power Plant Project Kreivenu Wind Power Plant Project Estimated emission reductions 2008-12 231,155 148,550 110.940 235,851 67,703 127 244  Source: Lithuania's National Allocation Plan for Greenhouse Gas Emission Allowances for the Period 2008 to 2012, NAP version 18.04.2007  Sub-step 4b.
Discuss any similar options that are occurring: The only wind farm that was built in Lithuania (near Kretingale) by not utilizing the JI scheme is still not in operation.
Institutional and legal barriers prevented the wind farm from becoming operational.
The wind power technology and civil construction costs were also lower when that wind farm was built.
Step 5.
Impact of JI registration As explained in Step 2, if the project developer is able to sell the 'carbon credits' from the project activity, the additional revenue would improve the financial viability.
Also the example of other JI wind projects in Lithuania proves that with the JI status a wind project will be able to attract equity and debt financing, and overcome the barriers described in step 3.
Financial modelling proves that the financial income from sale of Emission Reduction Units during 200812 improves the IRR of the project by almost one percentage point and enables to generate a positive NPV of the investment, thus making the project attractive for the investors to undertake.
The prepayment from the sale of carbon credits can also be utilized as part of the equity capital, thus lowering the financial risk for the equity investors.
a) Baseline scenario In accordance to the baseline scenario, electric power is produced only by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
Forecasted production of electric power and CO2 emissions are presented in Table 6.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 23  Table 6 Forecasted power production and CO2 emissions in 2008-2012 in baseline scenario AB Lietuvos Elektrine Year Production of electric power (MWh) 1,831,000 1,818,000 1,549,000 4,974,000 5,730,000 Sudenai and Lendimai wind farms Production of electric power (MWh) 0 0 0 0 0  Emissions, tCO2 1,151,699 1,143,522 974,321 3,128,646 3,604,170  Emissions, tCO2 0 0 0 0 0  2008 2009 2010 2011 2012  b) Project scenario: The project scenario foresees an establishment of wind power plant at Sudenai and Lendimai with a combined capacity of 14 MW.
The renewable electricity produced by the wind power plant will displace carbon intensive electricity produced from fossil fuel sources by AB Lietuvos Elektrine.
Table 7 Forecasted power production and CO2 emissions in 2008-2012 in baseline scenario Year AB Lietuvos Elektrine Production of electric power (MWh) 1,821,337 1,789,012 1,520,012 4,945,012 5,701,012 Emissions, tCO2 1,145,621 1,125,289 956,088 3,110,413 3,585,937 Sudenai and Lendimai wind farms Production of electric power (MWh) 9,662 28,988 28,988 28,988 28,988 Emissions, tCO2 0 0 0 0 0  2008 2009 2010 2011 2012  c) Emission reductions will occur due to the simple fact that the Baseline scenario represents a higher emission factor than the Project scenario.
Greenhouse gas emissions of the baseline scenario will exceed the emissions of the project baseline scenario by 18.233 tCO2 per year due to the additionality of the project.
During the period of 2008-2012 the difference between GHG emissions of baseline and project scenarios will make 79.012 tCO2e.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 24  B.3.
Description of how the definition of the project boundary is applied to the small-scale project: The BASREC JI Project Guidelines describes project boundaries as theoretical boundaries, determining the scope of project's impact on GHG emissions.
The sources of GHG involved in project boundaries represent the sources involved in baseline calculations.
The project boundary is drawn around the physical boundary of the wind power plants (i.e.
the wind turbines and generators) and the power plants of AB Lietuvos Elektrine, the power generation of which the wind power plants would replace.
The boundaries of the project are shown in Figure 1.
Project boundaries CO2 emissions of AB Lietuvos Elektrine in 2008-2012 Other producers of electric power  Sudenai and Lendimai wind power plants  Consumers of electric power  Figure 1 Project boundaries  B.4.
Further baseline information, including the date of baseline setting and the name(s) of the person(s)/entity(ies) setting the baseline: Baseline Study date: Nov. 6 2007 Conducted by: Nelja Energia OÜ in cooperation with LHCarbon OÜ, represented by Hannu Lamp.
Tel: +372 51 41 800, E-mail: Hannu@online.ee None of the above entities are considered as project participants.
Other baseline studies have been recently undertaken due to the development of other wind power JI projects in Lithuania.
The baseline study for the Rudaiciai Wind Power Park published in December 2006 at the UNFCC website has been used for this PDD8.
8  JI PDD of Rudaiciai Wind Power Park, December 2006, ver.
PDD 01  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 25  SECTION C. Duration of the small-scale project / crediting period C.1.
Starting date of the small-scale project: The wind farm construction will start on April 1 2008.
C.2.
Expected operational lifetime of the small-scale project: 20 years, 0 months C.3.
Length of the crediting period: Total crediting period: 4 years, 4 months (2008-2012) Starting date.
September 1, 2008 Pending decisions on the framework for generation and transfer of emissions reduction credits post 2012, the project developer may seek the right to earn credits for the period 2013 to 2017 in addition to emission reductions units (ERUs) generated under the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol (2008 to 2012).
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 26  SECTION D. Monitoring plan D.1.
Description of monitoring plan chosen:  The main requirements, being imposed on the monitoring plan, are pointed out in the Annex B of Chapter 6 of the Kyoto protocol (Decision 9/CMP.1, "Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol").
The following points have to be considered in the monitoring plan: • • • All the data necessary to the evaluation or the collection and storage of the data from all the sources of anthropogenic emissions and/or leakage.
These data are being collected and stored during all the crediting period; The collection and storage of all the data necessary for the calculation of the baseline from all the anthropogenic sources and leakage during all the crediting period; The determination of all the potential sources, the collection of information about them and storage of it in case of increasing GHG emissions from the anthropogenic sources as well as leakage that have intense and significant impact on the project during its crediting period and that are outside the project boundaries.
The project boundaries must involve all the sources and leakage of anthropogenic pollution under the maintenance of the participants of the project; The storage of the information about the state of environmental protection according to the requirements of the hosting country; The assurance of the quality of the monitoring and the procedures of control; The periodic calculation of the saved GHG, according to all the sources and leakage, if such are present.
• • •  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 27  D.2.
Data to be monitored: Data variable Source of data Data unit Measured (m), calculated (c), estimated (e) Recording frequency Proportion of data to be monitored How will the data be archived?
(electronic/ paper)  ID number (Please use numbers to ease crossreferencing to D.2.)
1  Data to be collected in order to monitor emission reductions from the project, and how these data will be archived:  EGy - Net electricity supplied to the grid  Project proponent  kWh  Measurement.
Directly measured with electricity meter, and checked with sales data  Monthly  100%  Electronic and in paper form  Data (Indicate table and ID number) 1.
EGy  D.3.
Quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) procedures undertaken for data monitored: Uncertainty level of data (high/medium/low)  Explain QA/QC procedures planned for these data, or why such procedures are not necessary.
The maximum allowed deviation of the meters is 0,5% (at 110 kV)  Data will be directly measured with metering equipment at the connection point to AB Lietuvos Energia grid at the 110 kV side of the transformer.
This equipment will be sealed, calibrated and checked periodically for accuracy.
In addition, all metered data will be double checked by receipts of electricity sales, with SCADA system as back-up.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 28  D.4.
Brief description the operational and management structure that the project operator will apply in implementing the monitoring plan:  The basic guidelines of the Monitoring Plan are as following: The project proponent will measure only the net electricity output of the wind power plants.
All other data will be collected at the beginning of the project, and presented in the Baseline Study and PDD.
In order to ensure a successful operation of the project and the credibility and verifiability of the emission reductions (ERs) achieved, Vejo Elektra UAB recognises that the project must have a well defined management and operational system.
The management and operation of the project is the responsibility of Vejo Elektra UAB i.e.
ensuring the environmental credibility of the project through accurate and systematic monitoring of the project's implementation and operation for the purpose of achieving trustworthy ERs.
Vejo Elektra UAB will outsource the daily monitoring and verification tasks to 4Energia which will as earlier described also be responsible for operation of the wind turbines.
Data handling and quality assurance: Data will be entered on a monthly basis to an MS Excel worksheet on basis of information provided by the power purchaser (AB Lietuvos Energia) on kWh delivered to the grid on basis of the installed bi-directional power meter.
Data will be double-checked with information from the wind farm's SCADA system which will be calibrated with the meter.
The power purchaser will also be asked to report on scheduled repair/replacement of the power meter.
Procedures in case of meter failures will be established.
Vejo Elektra UAB's manager Dainius Kriau i nas will be in charge of and accountable for the generation of ERs including monitoring, record keeping, computation of ERs and verification.
He will officially sign-off on all monitoring worksheets that are prepared by 4Energia and printed on a monthly basis.
Regular back-ups of the monitoring and SCADA databases will be made.
Reporting: Vejo Elektra UAB in cooperation with 4Energia will prepare a brief annual monitoring report which will include: information on overall project performance, emission reductions generated and comparison with targets.
The report will be provided to the verifier and to the Lithuanian JI focal point on an annual basis or more frequently if so decided.
Training: It is Vejo Elektra UAB's and 4Energia's responsibility to ensure that the required capacity and internal training is made available to its operational staff to enable them to undertake the tasks required by the MP.
Initial staff training will be provided by 4Energia before the project starts operating and generating ERs.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 29  Corrective Actions: Vejo Elektra UAB/4Energia will periodically undertake performance reviews as part of its ongoing operation and management.
Where corrective actions are required by the Lithuanian authorities or the verifiers, these will be acted upon within a reasonable timescale as dictated by relevant authorities.
Data collection: ID number Data variable MP1 Name EGy - Net electricity supplied to the grid Dainius Kriau i nas (kWh) Responsible person Position and department Member of the Management Board  D.5.
Name of person(s)/entity(ies) establishing the monitoring plan:  Dainius Kriau i nas, Vejo Elektra UAB.
Vejo Elektra UAB is a project participant as listed in Annex 1.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 30  SECTION E. Estimation of greenhouse gas emission reductions E.1.
Estimated project emissions and formulae used in the estimation: Wind power does not create any anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in operation, so project emissions are zero.
E.2.
Estimated leakage and formulae used in the estimation, if applicable: There are no direct or indirect emissions outside the project boundary attributable to the project activity.
E.3.
Sum of E.1.
and E.2.
: Since there are no leakages: E.1 + E.2 = E.1 (0) E.4.
Estimated baseline emissions and formulae used in the estimation:  Baseline emissions (BE) are calculated as following: BEy (tCO2) = EGy (MWh) x EFy (tCO2/MWh) EGy - Net electricity supplied to the grid EFy - Emission factor of the power plants of AB Lietuvos Elektrine Please refer to Section B for detail on how the emission factor (0.629 tCO2e/MWh) is calculated.
2008 Baseline emissions (in t CO2e) E.5.
6.078 2009 18.233 2010 18.233 2011 18.233 2012 18.233 2008-2012 79.012  Difference between E.4.
and E.3.
representing the emission reductions of the project: 2008 2009 18.233 2010 18.233 2011 18.233 2012 18.233 2008-2012 79.012  Baseline emissions = Project emissions (in t CO2e)  6.078  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 31  E.6.
Table providing values obtained when applying formulae above: Estimated project emissions (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) 0 0 0 0 0 0 Estimated leakage (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) 0 0 0 0 0 0 Estimated baseline emissions (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) 6.078 18.233 18.233 18.233 18.233 79.012 Estimated emission reductions (tonnes of CO2 equivalent) 6.078 18.233 18.233 18.233 18.233 79.012  Year  Year 2008 Year 2009 Year 2010 Year 2011 Year 2012 Total (tonnes of CO2 equivalent)  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 32  SECTION F. Environmental impacts F.1.
Documentation on the analysis of the environmental impacts of the project, including transboundary impacts, in accordance with procedures as determined by the host Party: Environmental impact assessment of UAB Lariteksas Sudenai wind farm - 4 wind turbines of 8 MW An environmental impact assessment (EIA) has already been carried out for the Sudenai UAB Lariteksas wind farm which concluded that no negative local or global environmental effects are expected with the implementation of wind farm project.
The consents of all nearby landowners were obtained on May 20, 2005.
At the beginning of the EIA process the society was informed by an announcement published in Kretinga regional newspaper "Svyturys" No.
59 (7582) on July 24, 2004 (About the conclusion of screening concerning Environmental Impact Assessment) and on June 4, 2005 (About public meeting of the Draft Environmental Impact Assessment).
Public meeting was held in Darbenai administration building on June 17, 2005.
No remarks or suggestions were received from the meeting parties.
The public demonstration of the EIA took place at Fundamental Science Faculty of Klaipeda University, Baltic Coast Environmental Research and Planning Institute of Klaipeda University, and at Darbenai administrative office from October 24, 2005 to November 7, 2005.
The next public meeting of the improved and updated EIA took place on November 8 2005.
The announcement of the public meeting was published in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
83 (7710) on October 22, 2005.
No planning suggestions or objections from the public were received at the meeting.
The meeting was held in Ipiltis branch of Kretinga Cultural Centre.
Seven participants came to the public meeting.
Mr. Saulius Gulbinskas (project manager and representative of Baltic Coast Environmental Research and Planning Institute of Klaipeda University) was elected as the chairman of the meeting and Rosita Mileriene (representative of Baltic Coast Environmental Research and Planning Institute of Klaipeda University) was elected as the secretary.
Other participants were Dainius Jurenas (former developer of wind park), Edvardas Stalmokas (foreman of Darbenai) and three local residents.
There were two main parts of the meeting: 1. presentation of EIA report and 2. speeches and discussions.
The EIA was approved by all related institutions and by the Decision Regarding Admissibility of Planned Economic Activities in the Environmental Perspective issued by the Klaipeda district Environmental Protection Department of the Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania on May 9 2006.
The approval was drawn with subsequent remarks and proposals: 1.
Works of intense movement of land are possible only after archaeological research is made, and founded valuables are researched and moved into state storages.
2.
Monitoring of noise should be performed.
3.
Factual measurements of noise should be performed after the park of wind power stations is built.
Additional measures for decreasing of noise shall be planned after estimating of exceeded maximum allowed levels of noise.
4.
Following the item 127.9 of 12-05-1992 of the Decision of Government of the Republic of Lithuania No.
343 "Regarding setting the special conditions for usage of land and forest", normalized distances from water bank shall be maintained.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 33  5.
While preparing the detailed plan, in order to avoid shading of wind power stations in the morning hours crossing Sud nai botanical - zoological reservation territory, it is necessary to examine the possibility to move wind power stations from the reservation border, as there is the distance of only 70 m. from the closest planned wind turbine generator to the border of Sud nai botanical - zoological reservation.
6.
The means for liquidation of negative shading effect shall be planned while arranging of the technical design.
Considering the remarks and proposals listed above, the Decision Regarding Admissibility of Planned Economic Activities in the Environmental Perspective, issued by the Klaipeda Region Environmental Protection Department of the Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania gives consent to pursuing the wind power station park plan pursuant to the EIA Report.
Environmental impact assessment of UAB Vejo Elektra Sudenai/Lendimai wind farm - 3 wind turbines of 6 MW An EIA was not necessary in the course of planning the Lendimai wind farm as stated in the official letter from State Service for Protected Areas under the Ministry of Environment "Concerning Environmental Impact Assessment" No.
V3-7.7-1096 issued on August 13, 2005 and in "Screening Conclusion Concerning Environmental Impact Assessment" of Klaipeda Regional Department of Environment of the Ministry of Environment of Republic of Lithuanian No.(9.14.5.
)-V4-3168 issued on September 6, 2005.
The above stated conclusion was drawn because (extract from the above mentioned document): "Considering the given information about the construction of three wind turbines at villages Sudenai and Lendimai, requirements of national legal acts and after the evaluation of protected natural valuables at Sudenai national botanical - zoological park (territory of European ecological net "Natura 2000" - Sudenai meadows) it is assumed that planned economical activity will not have significant negative effect on protected areas."
According to the "Screening Conclusion Concerning Environmental Impact Assessment" of Klaipeda Regional Department of Environment of the Ministry of Environment of Republic of Lithuania No.(9.14.5.
)-V4-3168 issued on September 6, 2005 the conclusion, concerning the environmental impact of the planned economic activity, was drawn that the environmental impact assessment (EIA) of the planned economic activity of UAB Vejo Elektra - installation and maintenance of wind power-plants - is not required.
The above stated conclusion was drawn because: • The planned economic activity is planned to be executed at a safe distance from inhabited localities • The planned wind turbine generators are widely used in European Union countries and their technical parameters match the standards of the best technology available in the EU.
• National Energy Strategy approved by the resolution No.IX-1130 of the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania of October 10, 2002 (Official Gazette., 2002, No 99-4397) schedules, that aiming to the best use local resources, including wind energy, and at the same time to reduce the import of fuel and to establish new work places as well as to improve the state of environmental protection, the State will promote the implementation of the projects on use of wind, water and sun power and the experience of installation and maintenance will be collected; • At the territory of the planned economic activity it is not forbidden to install and maintain the equipment of planned economic activity.
The planned wind farms will have no significant transboundary effects in Latvia as not settlements across the border are established in the vicinity of the wind farm.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 34  F.2.
If environmental impacts are considered significant by the project participants or the host Party, provision of conclusions and all references to supporting documentation of an environmental impact assessment undertaken in accordance with the procedures as required by the host Party: The Environmental impact assessment for Sudenai wind farm specifies the impact to the environment of the wind turbines to be built by Lariteksas.
Practically there are no natural flora community at the territory of wind parks.
The land area where wind parks will be located will occupy a insignificant area of land of agricultural needs, therefore the wind parks of UAB Lariteksas will not influence the flora of the territory.
As the wind farm is farther from Sudenai botanic-zoological reserve park, the wind park will not have major influence to the Sudenai park and territories important for habitat conservation protection values.
After the construction of wind turbines there will be some high-rise constructions of technological design that will rise above landscape elements.
It will change the visual characteristics of the territory.
The constructions of the wind parks will be seen from all near territories.
From further territories these constructions will be blocked off by forests (from regional road Skuodas-Darbenai and from road Butinge-Liepoja).
General view of wind parks will be seen from Benaiciai-Sudenai villages, where only a few inhabitants live.
The wind parks on Impilties mound will be blocked off by other natural elements - forests, trees.
The full view of wind parks will be seen from Latvian side and from of other side of the valley of the river Sventoji.
The assessed zone of shading impact shows that the discomfort caused by shading will be experienced by two farms to the North East from the wind farm.
Compensatory means are planned for them.
Compensatory means for farms nearest to the wind farm would include plants which would cover wind power stations at the time when the shadow of the wind power stations covers the farms.
The plants will be planted only after the owners of the farms approve them because it would be effective if only they would be planted near these farms (on their private territory).
If necessary, the shadow shutdown system of Enercon will be utilized in order to reduce shadow flickering at the residential areas as well as at Sud nai botanical-zoological reservation territory.
This system is able to detect the lighting conditions and to decide whether periodical shadow flickering is possible.
The system shuts down wind turbines during shadow casting periods at emission sites taking weather conditions into consideration.
Detailed calculations of the shadowing effect prepared by Enercon indicate that in the worst case the possible reduction of the production would be 100 hours per year which equals ca.
1% of the annual production.
The real reduction will be much lower as the worst case calculation assumes that: - the sun is shining all day from sunrise to sunset, - the rotor plane is always perpendicular to the line from the wind turbine to the sun, - the wind turbine is always operating.
According to the preliminary calculations, when the noise level of one wind turbine is 102.1 dB (A), the total noise level caused by four wind turbines will decrease down to 45 dB (A) at the distance of 172215 meters.
In order to avoid the negative impact of noise on people in the neighborhood, the wind farm must stand at least 215 m away from the nearest farms.
Under the Laws of Lithuania, the noise level requirements are regulated by hygiene norm HN 33-1:2003 "Acoustic noise.
Allowed levels in residential and labouring environment.
Common requirements of method of measurement" approved by The Order of Minister of Medical Security No.
V-520 dated  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 35  September 3, 2003 ("HN").
HN stipulates maximum allowed level of noise in the territories of residential accommodations, as provided below: Object Level of sound, equivalent level of sound, dBA 55 50 45 Maximum level of sound, dBA 70 65 60 Hours of a day  Territory of residential accommodations  6-18 18-22 22-6  The electromagnetic radiation caused by the wind power stations park will have no negative impact on human health (it will not exceed the permitted norm of 15 kV/m and will not even amount to 0.5 kV/m).
The beams have only negative impact close to 110 kV line and in a range close to generators, which are located at a 80 meters height.
Electromagnetic radiation may have negative impact only on telecommunication signals (as shown of the experience of analogous activity).
If such experience occurs the manager of planned activity and the individual that has suffered from the effect of electromagnetic radiation on telecommunication signal should identify the reason of such event and implement means of technical compensation at the expense of manager.
As for the risk of possible accidents, the wind power station towers will stand at the distance of 145 meters from the regional road "Darb nai - Laukžem ".
No other steadings, farms or halls are situated further than 145 meters from the wind power station towers.
According to "Sanitary Preservative Zone Boundaries' Establishment and Schedule Regulations" and according to "Special Conditions of Use of Land and Forest" the normative sanitary preservative zone for a wind farm is not set.
There are no registered immovable cultural valuables in the territory of planned wind power station.
The closest immovable cultural valuables are in 600-700m from the wind park therefore this park will not have any negative influence on these valuables.
There were no possible negative impact on recreational and tourism resources of the region found during the EIA.
The EIA report was examined by several institutions which presented their evaluations.
Conclusions of the authorities that evaluated impact on the environment were as follows: 1.
The Administration of the Klaipeda County Governor by its Letter No.
13.1-34015(17.1-9.3) of 23-03-2006 approves of the Report with a comment (as the nearest wind power station is only at the distance 70 m from the boundary of the Sud nai botanic - zoological reservation, when making the detailed plan, in order to avoid shading covering the reservation territory in morning hours, it is necessary to examine an alternative to move the WPS farther from the boundary of the reservation).
2.
The Administration of the Kretinga District Municipality by its Letter No.
(6.27.
)-D34228 of 08-12-2005 approves of the Report.
3.
Kretinga Branch of the Klaip da Public Health Centre by its Letter No.
(18.1.13)-V4136 of 02-03-2006 approves of the Report with a condition (the technical design must implement measures enabling to liquidate the negative impact of shading).
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 36  4.
The State Fire Prevention Inspectorate of the Kretinga Fire and Rescue Service by its Letter No.
1/10-508 of 01-12-2005 approves of the Report.
5.
The Klaip da Territorial Division of the Cultural Heritage Department under the Ministry of Culture by its Letter No.
(1.40)-2K1-11 of 21-12-2005 approves of the Report.
6.
The State Service of Protected Territories its Letter No.
V3-7.7-172 of 27-01-2006 does not object to the possibility to construct the wind power stations park.
SECTION G. Stakeholders' comments G.1.
Information on stakeholders' comments on the project, as appropriate:  Stakeholder comments have been invited and compiled in accordance with all local planning legislation as outlined below.
While preparing the detailed plans, compulsory stakeholder consultations (incl.
meetings and public displays) were undertaken.
Also written agreements of residents in surrounding areas were obtained during the process of detailed planning.
Stakeholders have not expressed any objections to the proposed development.
Detailed land use planning process In order to establish the wind farms it was necessary to form parcels of land and to change the purpose of land use for the park of wind power stations.
For this purpose and following the Zoning Law of the Republic of Lithuania9, it was necessary to perform the detailed planning of the land parcels.
Pursuant to the Rules for Preparation of Detailed Plans10, the territory planning process consists of: (i) the preparatory stage during which the aims and objectives of the planning are established, the planning action program is prepared and approved, etc.
; (ii) the stage of preparation of the territory planning document, analysing the existing situation, formulating the conception, concretising solutions; (iii) the stage of evaluation of solution consequences; (iv) the final stage during which solutions of the territory planning document are discussed and approved and the territory planning document is approved.
A detailed plan which is prepared in accordance with the established procedure and conditions and approved by relevant authorities, the solutions of which are not in conflict with laws, the requirements set in special conditions for land use, the effective solutions of master plans and special plans made for the municipal territory or its parts, is to be approved by a relevant municipal council.
Law No.
I-1120 of the Republic of Lithuania on Zoning, dated 12 December 1995.
Order No.
D1-239 of the Minister of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania on approval of the Rules for Preparation of Detailed Plans, dated 3 May 2004.
10  9  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 37  Detailed plan of UAB Vejo Elektra Sudenai/Lendimai wind farm - 3 wind turbines of 6 MW Detailed planning of two land units (9.75 ha, at S d nai village, cadastre No.
5647/0003:7 Laukžem s k.v, and 7.8 ha, at Lendimai village, cadastre No.
5667/0001:0003 Senosios pilties k.v) started after adoption by the Director of Administration of the Kretinga District Municipality of his Ordinances of 16 September 2005 No.
A1-538 and A1-537 and conclusion by the Company of the Agreements on Organization and Financing of Planning with the Kretinga District Municipality (Director of Administration of the Municipality) as the formal Organizer of the planning, on 19 September 2005.
As the result of the detailed planning the land plots were split into 2 separate land plots at Lendimai village and into 3 land plots at S d nai village.
The newly formed 3 small land plots of 1375 sq.m.
each will be used for erection of the wind power stations of 2 MW.
These 3 small land plots of engineering and communication infrastructure purpose will be formed within the bigger current agricultural land plots (named above), the purpose of which will not be changed.
Access to the small land plots on which the wind power stations are to be built will be ensured through public roads adjacent to the land plots and easements (servitudes) to be formed as a result of the detailed planning (which will come into force only after approval of the detailed plans and registration of the easements with the Real Property Register).
In the process of detailed planning various sanitary protection zones of the wind power stations ranging from 120 m to 300 m from the axis of the wind power stations were set down and agreed in writing with the owners of the adjacent land plots.
Pursuant to national law stakeholders were informed about possibility to participate in detailed planning process, pretence giving order and public exposition and public consideration place and date in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" No.
35 (7746) published on May 10, 2006.
Public display of detailed plans took place at Municipality of Kretinga county (Savanoriu str.
29, Kretinga) from May 11, 2006 to May 25, 2006.
The first public meeting of the draft detailed plans took place on May 25 2006.
The meeting was announced in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
35 (7764)) on May 10, 2006.
No planning suggestions or objections from the public were received at the meeting.
The meeting was held in Klaipeda county municipality.
The planning manager (Kretinga county municipality manager) Valerijones erneckis, senior architect of Kretinga county municipality department of Architecture and Urbanistics Jonas Petrulis, representative of detailed plan organizers Rolandas Rumšas, and planner Aušra Debolskyte participated at the meeting.
A decision was adopted that public meeting procedure was accomplished.
Additional public display of detailed plans took place at Municipality of Kretinga county (Savanoriu str.
29A, Kretinga) from June 23, 2006 to June 27, 2006.
The next public meeting of the detailed plans took place on June 27 2006.
The meeting was announced in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
48 (7777)) on June 23, 2006.
No planning suggestions or objections from the public were received at the meeting.
The meeting was held in Kretinga county municipality.
The planning manager (Kretinga county municipality manager) Valerijones erneckis, senior architect of Kretinga county municipality department of Architecture and Urbanistics Jonas Petrulis, representative of detailed plan organizers Rolandas Rumšas, and planner Aušra Debolskyte participated at the meeting.
A decision was adopted that public meeting procedure was accomplished and to present all materials concerning the wind power project of UAB Vejo Elektra to the Administration of the Governor of Klaipeda area.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 38  The above detailed plans were approved by the Klaip da district Environmental Protection Department of the Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania on 06 September 2005, by the Kretinga branch of the Klaip da Public Health Centre of the Ministry of Health Care of the Republic of Lithuania on 05 June 2006, by the Military Air Forces of the Lithuanian Army on 10 November 2005, and by other authorities.
The detailed plans of the Lendimai and S d nai villages of Kretinga district were finally approved on June 29 2006 by the Council of the Kretinga District Municipality decisions No.
T2-188 and No.
T2187.
Detailed plan of UAB Lariteksas Sudenai wind farm - 4 wind turbines of 8 MW The detailed plan foresees an establishment of four wind turbine generators in S d nai village of Kretinga district.
As the result of the planning 6 new land plots were formed: 4 for the wind power stations (1250 sq.
m each), one for the transformer substation (1800 sq.
m) and one larger agricultural land plot within which all the smaller land plots are situated.
Detailed planning of the above land plots started after adoption by the Council of the Kretinga District Municipality of its Ordinance of 29 July 2004 No.
T2-246 and conclusion by the Company of the Agreement on Transfer of Detailed Planning Organizers rights with the Kretinga District Municipality (Director of Administration of the Municipality) as the formal Organizer of the planning, on 5 August 2004.
In the process of territory detailed planning the various sanitary protection zones of the wind power stations ranging from 120 m to 300 m from the axis of the wind power stations were set down.
In the process of preparation of the detailed plan, the consents of the owners of the adjacent land plots, which will be affected by the shadowing and noise were obtained, whereby they consented with the effect of shadowing and noise to their land plots as made by the power stations.
The detailed plan further states that in noise sensitive areas the wind turbines may at night work at reduced speed and power.
If necessary the level of noise generated at night may thus be reduced.
The detailed plan provides that due to shadowing generated by the wind power stations the compensatory measures can be introduced.
Vegetation could be planted at the territories of the nearing farms and upon obtaining of the consents of the owners.
Also the Minutes of the Hygiene Expertise of the Project Documents, dated 7 June 2006, state that compensation measures are to be foreseen to reduce the shadow effect.
Pursuant to national law stakeholders were informed about the projects detailed plan preparations planning goals and deadlines in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" No.
98 (7725) on December 14, 2005.
Pursuant to national law stakeholders were informed about possibility to participate in detailed planning process, pretence giving order and public exposition and public consideration place and date in the regional newspaper.
It was announced in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
25 (7754)) on April 1, 2006 and additionally on (No.
35 (7764)) on May 10, 2006.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 39  Public display of detailed plan took place from April 1 to April 14, 2006 and from May 10 to May 22, 2006 at the Municipality of Kretinga county.
Public meeting of the draft detailed plans took place on April 15, 2006.
The public meeting was announced in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
25 (7754)) on April 1, 2006.
No planning suggestions or objections from the public were received at the meeting or by the addresses mentioned in the newspaper.
The meeting was held at the Department of Architecture-Urbanistics of Kretinga county municipality.
The planning manager Dainius Jurenas, secretary of the meeting Mantas Kisonas and chairwoman of the meeting Kristina Janaviciene participated at the meeting.
Representatives of related parties did not arrive to the meeting, accordingly the decision was adopted that another public meeting should be held.
Another public meeting of the detailed plan took place on May 22, 2006.
The meeting was announced in the regional newspaper "Svyturys" (No.
35 (7764)) on May 10, 2006.
No planning suggestions or objections from the public were received at the meeting or by the addresses mentioned in the newspaper.
The meeting was held at the county municipality of Kretinga.
The planning manager Dainius Jurenas, secretary of the meeting Mantas Kisonas and chairwoman of the meeting Kristina Janaviciene participated at the meeting.
The detailed plan was finally approved by the Council of the Kretinga Municipality on 29 June 2006 No.
T2-189.
This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 40  Annex 1 CONTACT INFORMATION ON PROJECT PARTICIPANTS Organisation: Street/P.O.Box: Building: City: State/Region: Postal code: Country: Phone: Fax: E-mail: URL: Represented by: Title: Salutation: Last name: Middle name: First name: Department: Phone (direct): Fax (direct): Mobile: Personal e-mail: Vejo Elektra UAB Tuskul n g. 33c Vilnius Lt-09219 Lithuania +370 685 21249 +370 5 272 2332 tadas@4energia.ee  Director Mr. Navickas Tadas +370 685 21249 +370 5 272 2332 tadas@4energia.ee  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT DESIGN DOCUMENT FORM FOR SMALL-SCALE PROJECTS - Version 01.1 Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee page 41  Organisation: Street/P.O.Box: Building: City: State/Region: Postal code: Country: Phone: Fax: E-mail: URL: Represented by: Title: Salutation: Last name: Middle name: First name: Department: Phone (direct): Fax (direct): Mobile: Personal e-mail:  Nordic Environment Finance Corporation, NEFCO in its capacity as Fund Manager to the Baltic Sea Region Testing Ground Facility Fabianinkatu, P.O.
Box 249 34 Helsinki FI-00171 Finland +358 9 18 001 +358 9 630 976 www.nefco.org Ash Sharma Programme Manager, Testing Ground Facility Mr. Sharma Ash +358 40 08 11 327 +358 9 630 976 +358 40 08 11 327 ash.sharma@nefco.fi  This template shall not be altered.
It shall be completed without modifying/adding headings or logo, format or font.
A national laboratory of the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy  National Renewable Energy Laboratory Innovation for Our Energy Future  Overview of Offshore Wind Technology Preprint C.P.
Butterfield, W. Musial, and J. Jonkman To be presented at the Chinese Renewable Energy Industry Association WindPower Shanghai Conference Shanghai, China October 31 - November 3, 2007  Conference Paper NREL/CP-500-42252 October 2007  NREL is operated by Midwest Research Institute ● Battelle  Contract No.
DE-AC36-99-GO10337  NOTICE The submitted manuscript has been offered by an employee of the Midwest Research Institute (MRI), a contractor of the US Government under Contract No.
DE-AC36-99GO10337.
Accordingly, the US Government and MRI retain a nonexclusive royalty-free license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution, or allow others to do so, for US Government purposes.
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States government.
Neither the United States government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States government or any agency thereof.
The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States government or any agency thereof.
Available electronically at http://www.osti.gov/bridge Available for a processing fee to U.S. Department of Energy and its contractors, in paper, from: U.S. Department of Energy Office of Scientific and Technical Information P.O.
Box 62 Oak Ridge, TN 37831-0062 phone: 865.576.8401 fax: 865.576.5728 email: mailto:reports@adonis.osti.gov Available for sale to the public, in paper, from: U.S. Department of Commerce National Technical Information Service 5285 Port Royal Road Springfield, VA 22161 phone: 800.553.6847 fax: 703.605.6900 email: orders@ntis.fedworld.gov online ordering: http://www.ntis.gov/ordering.htm  Printed on paper containing at least 50% wastepaper, including 20% postconsumer waste  Overview of Offshore Wind Technology C. P. (Sandy) Butterfield, W. Musial and J. Jonkman National Renewable Energy Laboratory Golden, Colorado USA +1 303 384 6902 (Phone) +1 303 384 6901 (FAX) Sandy_Butterfield@NREL.Gov  Abstract Over the past 10 years, offshore wind energy has become a major focus of European wind energy research and deployment.
Although current technology has been based mainly on land-based wind turbine designs, more turbines are being designed specifically for offshore applications.
New standards have been developed to address the unique design environment imposed by loading from both turbulent wind acting on the blades, rotor nacelle assembly (RNA), and ocean wave forces acting on the support structure.
The rapid growth of offshore wind applications has presented new challenges to wind turbine engineers.
Technology unique to offshore oil and gas industry must be joined with the design technology for wind turbines.
This paper is a short overview of some of the challenges facing the growth of offshore wind technology.
Keywords: Wind turbine, offshore, floating, hydrodynamic behavior  Introduction Offshore wind turbines are not a new idea.
Heronemus [1] proposed them more than 30 years ago.
His idea was a floating concept that would produce hydrogen that would feed a pipeline to shore.
Since then, although offshore technologies are still in their infancy, land-based wind turbines have gown in number, size and improved economics.
Today the cost of land-based wind energy rivals that of most fossil fuels and is likely to be less expensive than new "clean" coal.
This success story can be credited to three advancements, 1) dramatic reductions in turbine costs, 2) improved reliability and 3) economies of manufacturing scale.
The first two advancements were a result of improvements in design techniques and design tools.
Engineers learned through exhaustive testing that the analytical tools they used for earlier machines were not adequate for predicting fatigue loads and extreme loads-the loads that drive the designs.
Inaccurate predictions lead to premature failures.
This realization led to extensive research in U.S. and European laboratories.
Aerodynamics research was performed.
Aeroelastic dynamics models were developed.
Finally, standards were developed.
All of this work evolved into a more mature design process that is currently implied in a suite of International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standards [2].
It took 15 years for the teams of engineers that developed these different standards to reach a consensus on difficult topics such as a standard set of design external conditions and extreme environment conditions, critical design load cases, methods to arrive at acceptable extreme loads and fatigue loads, testing methods to verify their analyses and certification methods that would ensure consistent quality.
The result was a far more reliable and economical fleet of turbines.
It also created a basis for educating the next generation of wind energy engineers.
However, very little of this type of research was done for offshore development until Europeans began experimental projects in the shallow waters surrounding Denmark [3].
The third advancement was due to consistent national policy that created a positive economic environment, mainly for Denmark and Germany.
Offshore meteorological and ocean (met/ocean) environmental conditions add to the engineering challenge.
In addition to turbulence loading exciting dynamically active structures, there are powerful ocean waves that randomly excite the same structure.
This is significantly different than the relatively static structures for offshore oil and gas operations.
Although these structures can be flexible, none of them have dynamically active rotors introducing nonlinear loads to the load spectrum.
Adding another stochastic load to the design effort requires nonlinear time series analyses using coupled aeroelastic/hydrodynamics analyses.
Hydrodynamic analyses require modeling the physics of both waves and the structure's dynamic response to them.
Aeroelastic analyses require time variant aerodynamic loading interacting with a dynamic structure.
Both can be extremely complicated, but rarely are they combined into a coupled analysis.
This presents an entirely new challenge.
1  These challenges will limit maturity and innovation in offshore wind energy until adequate research is devoted to it developing and validating design tools.
Over the past 10 years [3] projects have been deployed in waters less than 20 m in depth using existing structural dynamic codes adapted from offshore oil and gas technology and the wind industry (decoupled).
All have been fixed bottom support structures, making the dynamic analyses easier, mainly because they can be treated separately.
The reason offshore deployment has happened in Europe and not places like the United States is the economic stimulants favorable to wind energy in Europe.
Governments have provided long-term commitments to supporting renewable energy.
Also, land-based wind resources are not as great as offshore resources, and high population density discourages large-scale wind farm developments like those common in the western and Midwestern United States.
Finally, the waters surrounding many northern European countries are shallow enough to make relatively inexpensive support structures possible.
This picture changes for U.S. waters.
While the United States has plentiful offshore wind resources, shallow water depths are not as plentiful as they are in Europe.
Water depths for sites more than 5 km offshore are more likely to exceed 20 m, forcing developers to consider alternative support structures.
These are likely to become more expensive [4], The following report gives a short overview of some of the technical challenges and possible future challenges.
Current Technology As wind turbine technology has scaled up to meet demand, the cost of energy (COE) has dropped.
The reason for this is partly that the cost of maintenance and infrastructure favors fewer machines per total wind farm capacity and partly because the cost of shipping individual turbine components to various site locations has not been prohibitively expensive.
Also, turbine costs per rating have not dramatically increased with size as shown by Malcolm et, al [5].
This last point runs counter to engineering physics.
Physical principles would suggest that turbine costs would increase as the third power of the rotor diameter, yet power only scales with the square of the diameter.
This suggests that as turbine diameter increases, the amount of material (and hence cost) would out pace power (and hence energy) available.
In other words, physical principles would suggest that turbines should get more expensive with increasing rotor diameter.
This is explained by Manwell [6] and others in wind energy text books.
However, engineers have been able to keep the cost per rating nearly constant for wind turbines through continued technology improvement and innovation.
This trend continued until components such as the blades and tower base sections became so large that they could no longer be easily shipped over normal roadways.
Figure 1 shows this trend for commercial machines such as Vestas (V80, V90) and Siemens turbines compared to strict scaling without technology innovation as shown by Malcolm [5] in the WindPACT studies.
The commercial turbines have been able to actually reduce their specific RNA mass with increasing diameter by applying technology innovations with each new turbine model.
However, as turbine diameters exceeded 1.5 to 2.0 MW ratings, the shipping costs began to sharply rise.
This fact supports offshore applications for larger machines because of the relatively low cost of transportation over waterways that have virtually no restrictions on component size.
But the dramatic increase in installation costs for offshore applications has driven overall costs up.
When you add the increase in operations and maintenance cost at sea, offshore wind WindPact Baselines energy looses its low transportation WindPact Task#5 Final RNA Mass / Swept Area cost advantage.
NREL Baseline 5MW 40.0 35.0 Mass/swept area (kg/m^2) 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 10.0 5.0  While the wind industry will agree that the cost of offshore wind energy is higher than land-based, many argue that offshore wind energy is still cost competitive with land-based fossil fuel generation when environmental impacts are added into the cost equation.
Furthermore, industry expects technology improvements to pave the way for the same kind of cost reductions that have made land-based  GPRA 2005 - 2025 Estimates RePower 5MW  Offshore Turbines  Enercon 6MW V120 4.5MW MultiBrid 5MW GE 3.6MW V80 V90 Siemens  Path to 3.5 cents/kwh, DOE onshore goal 40 60 80 100 120 140 Diameter (m)  0.0  Figure 1: Impact of Maturing Technology and Innovation on Specific Rotor Nacelle Mass with Increasing Rotor Diameter  2  wind energy a viable alternative.
For this reason, efforts to evolve offshore wind turbine technologies continue.
Today there are several 5-MW wind turbine prototypes and one commercially available.
These are shown inside the circle of Figure 1.
Most of these turbines were designed using land-based standards such as IEC 61400-1 [2] plus draft versions of IEC 61400-3 [2] for offshore turbines.
But this standard has not been approved through national vote at this time and it does not cover floating turbines.
In addition to international standards, turbines have been designed using GL [7] and DNV [8] guidelines.
Design Tools and Methods The complexity of the task to develop accurate modeling tools will increase with the degree of flexibility and coupling of the turbine and platform.
Usually this results in greater dynamic responses to wave and wind loading.
Predicting wave loads and dynamic behavior for a stable fixed bottom platform is a challenge, but it has been done, as shown by Passon [10].
However, these codes must be validated just as the land-based codes were validated using test data and code-to-code comparisons.
The IEA [11] is currently engaged in an exercise to verify the dominant analytical codes today.
Passon [12] describes this valuable task of comparing predicted loads and motions by most of the top analytical experts in Europe and the United States.
The coupled dynamics of floating support structures are even more difficult.
Jonkman [9] and Hansen [14] have shown how this can be done by joining proven wind turbine aeroelastic codes with hydrodynamic modules.
Platforms such as tension leg platforms will require new analytical tools but are likely to be less difficult to design than platforms that are more susceptible to wave loading.
Platforms, such as barge concepts, that have a large part of their structure near the free surface will have larger pitch, roll, and heave forces.
A barge is likely to violate simple Morison's Equations assumption, which will be more complex to model and validate.
Spar concepts will have smaller tower top motions relative to the barge but may still be subject to nonlinear wave forces requiring more advanced tools.
Support Structures Figure 2 illustrates a variety of offshore support structures that are in use or under consideration.
The first is a gravity foundation which, as the name implies, relies on gravity to secure it to the bottom.
These work well in very shallow water where the seabed can be prepared using surface vessels and the foundation can be cast in concrete and floated to the site for placement.
The second is by far the most popular.
It is a "monopile" and has been used in waters around Denmark and the United Kingdom.
The third is a tripod.
This could be used in water with depths of more than 20 m. It capitalizes on offshore oil and gas experience.
A jacket structure, which is more common to oil and gas truss structures, was used in the Beatrice project [15] in 45 m •Figure 2: Investigated support structure concepts water depths off the coast of Scotland.
The fourth within the IEA Wind Annex 23 - OC3 project [4] example is a floating support structure.
The IEA Offshore Code Comparison Collaborative (OC3) [11] project will compare predictions from various hydroelastic codes for all of these types of support structures.
Future Offshore Technology Offshore wind technology will continue to evolve.
For land-based machines, the most obvious evolution over the past two decades has been rotor diameter scaling.
Now, with industry developing machines with 100-m diameter rotors, the scaling race is slowing for land-based wind turbines, but for offshore turbines, the scaling evolution is likely to continue.
There are several 5-MW and even 10-MW turbines in development or on the drawing boards, but only one is being offered for commercial sale.
Companies have experienced the difficulty of reliable offshore operation and are wary of deploying turbines before they have proven reliable performance.
On the other hand, many recognize there is a very large market for offshore turbines, particularly an economic floating turbine for deep water applications.
Butterfield et al [16] outline the importance of floating turbines as  3  well as the technical challenges.
As turbines are designed specifically for the offshore application many innovations are likely to be tested.
The following are a few of the most likely.
Light-Weight Turbines Offshore wind turbines are dramatically affected by weight.
Weight aloft tends to cascade down the support structure, increasing the cost all the way to the foundation.
Both static and dynamic loads are increased.
Light-weight rotors will be more flexible and shed dynamic loads, which will reduce the required support structure.
More expensive materials might be used in an effort to control flexibility while reducing weight.
For example, it might pay to use more carbon in the blades if it reduces material cost elsewhere in the structure.
It might also pay to make the blades dramatically more flexible to shed load.
The challenge with this design strategy is deflection control.
The blades must clear the tower.
Downwind Rotors With upwind rotors blade deflection is limited by the tower clearance.
IEC standards limit the allowable minimum clearance under extreme loading conditions.
This has resulted in turbines with up-tilt in the rotornacelle axis, forward coned blades and even forward curved blades.
All these configuration choices lead to increasing the loads in the blades and the nacelle.
Blades are no longer load limited.
They are deflection limited.
Almost three decades ago downwind turbines were common for the obvious load relieving advantages.
Wind thrust loads tend to deflect blades downwind, away from the tower.
In other words, the average tower clearance would increase rather than decrease with increasing thrust loads, as they do with all modern upwind turbines.
The reason designers moved away from downwind turbines is that local residents were annoyed by the low frequency noise caused by blades passing through the tower shadow.
In northern Europe this is a critical issue.
However, much has been learned over the years about noise and how to mitigate it.
Tower shadow noise has not been a major research topic, because the northern European industry chose to avoid it by designing upwind rotors.
Now, that choice is limiting the flexibility of the blades.
However, most offshore turbines will be placed far enough away from dwellings that it is not likely to matter if turbines make more noise.
Furthermore, research of tower shadow physics is likely to lead to solutions to mitigate tower shadow noise.
Two blades Two-bladed turbines were dropped by the European market for aesthetic reasons.
However, it is possible that cost advantages of one less blade will bring designers back to this idea.
In the late 70s and early 80s, there were several commercial two-bladed designs.
Many were technically viable but needed more development to resolve engineering problems.
Some researchers have suggested that offshore turbines would benefit from the lighter weight of two-bladed concepts [17].
Floating Support Structures The vision for large-scale offshore floating wind turbines was introduced by Professor William E. Heronemus at the University of Massachusetts in 1972 [1], but it was not until the mid 1990's, after the commercial wind industry was well established, that the topic was taken up again by the mainstream research community.
Current fixed-bottom technology has seen limited deployment to water depths of 20 m. As the technology advances into deeper water, floating wind turbine platforms may be the most economical means for deploying offshore wind turbines at some sites.
Worldwide, the offshore wind resource has been shown to be extremely abundant, with the U.S. energy potential ranked second only to China [4].
Strategy for Economic Floating Wind Turbines Floating platforms for wind turbines must be optimized to achieve the lowest life cycle cost of the entire system.
Unlike land-based installations, the cost of offshore wind is not dominated by turbine costs, but by multiple balance-of-station (BOS) and operating expense (OPEX) factors.
When floating wind turbines are introduced, a large focus must be placed on limiting foundation costs, but at the same time intelligent systemengineering decisions must be made to ensure that platform costs do not drive up the cost of other critical cost elements.
More optimistically, floating platforms introduce a new design paradigm that may offer unique opportunities to reduce the weight and cost of companion systems.
4  Floating Platform Classification As mentioned earlier, floating platform configurations may vary widely.
Typically, the overall architecture of a floating platform will be determined by a first-order static stability analysis, although there are many other critical factors that will determine the size and character of the final design.
However, once the platform topology has been established, a crude economic feasibility analysis becomes possible.
Therefore, to focus the discussion, a classification system was developed that divides all platforms into three general categories based on the physical principle or strategy that is used to achieve static stability: 1) Ballast: Platforms that achieve stability by using ballast weights hung below a central buoyancy tank that creates a righting moment and high inertial resistance to pitch and roll and usually enough draft to offset heave motion.
Spar-buoys like the one shown in Figure 3 apply this strategy to achieve stability [4].
2) Mooring Lines: Platforms that achieve stability through the use of mooring line tension.
The tension leg platform (TLP), like the one shown in the center of Figure 3, relies on mooring line tension for righting stability [4].
3) Buoyancy: Platforms that achieve stability through the use of distributed buoyancy, taking advantage of weighted water plane area for righting moment [4].
This is the principle used in a barge shown in Figure 3.
Unique Offshore Challenges The challenges that all offshore turbines will face are: • • • • • Installation cost Reliability Operations and maintenance at sea Remote monitoring and diagnostics Validation of extreme loads  The challenges for floating systems add the following to this list: • • • • • Static and dynamic stability Load prediction code validation Large motion and acceleration tolerant turbine design Light-weight turbine design Low-cost mooring systems & anchors  Conclusions Offshore turbines present a new set of engineering and economic challenges.
Although the engineering challenges are surmountable using established offshore oil and gas technology, innovation will be needed to meet the economic challenges to offshore wind technologies and to achieve economically viable, reliable operation for at least 20 years.
For floating systems, these challenges are even more unique and demanding.
Research, testing and standards will all play an important role.
Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank the U.S. Department of Energy for their continued support of this work.
References: 1.
2.
Heronemus, W. E. "Pollution-Free Energy From Offshore Winds", 8th Annual Conference and Exposition Marine Technology Society, Washington D.C., September 11-13, 1972.
IEC 61400-1 & 61400-3 Draft Standards: http://www.iec.ch/  5  3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Offshore Information Web site: http://www.offshorewindenergy.org/ Musial, W.D.
; Butterfield, C.P.
"Future for Offshore Wind Energy in the United States" NREL/CP-50036313 - Energy Ocean Proceedings, Palm Beach, FL, June 2004.
Malcolm, D. J.; Hansen, A. C. (2006).
WindPACT Turbine Rotor Design Study: June 2000--June 2002 (Revised).
84 pp.
; NREL Report No.
SR-500-32495.
Manwell, J., et al, "Wind Power Explained - Theory, Design and Application" Published by Wiley.
GL Offshore Design Standard: http://www.gl-group.com/brochurepdf/0E504.pdf DNV Offshore Design Standard: http://www.dnv.com/publications/oilgas_news/oilgasnews-32006/NewDNVstandardsforwindturbinedesign.asp.
Jonkman, J. M.; Sclavounos, P. D. (2006).
Development and Verification of Fully Coupled aero-elastic and Hydrodynamic Models for Offshore Wind Turbines.
24pp.
; NREL Report No.
CP-500-39066.
10.
Passon, P.; (2005) "State-of-the-art and Development Needs of Simulation Codes for Offshore Wind Turbines.
Copenhagen Offshore Wind Energy Conference, Copenhagen, DK.
2005.
11.
IEA Wind Annex 23 - OC3 Web Site: http://www.ieawind.org/Annex%20XXIII/Subtask2.html.
12.
Passon, P.; Kuhn, M.; Butterfield, S.; Jonkman, J.; Camp, T.; Larsen, T. J.
(2007).
OC3 -- Benchmark Exercise of Aero-Elastic Offshore Wind Turbine Codes: Preprint.
15 pp.
; NREL Report No.
CP-500-41930.
13.
Jonkman, J. M.; Buhl, M. L. Jr. (2007).
Development and Verification of a Fully Coupled Simulator for Offshore Wind Turbines: Preprint.
28 pp.
; NREL Report No.
CP-500-40979 14.
Jonkman, J. M.; Buhl, M. L., Jr. (2007).
Loads Analysis of a Floating Offshore Wind Turbine Using Fully Coupled Simulation: Preprint.
35 pp.
; NREL Report No.
CP-500-41714.
15.
Hansen, T. et al, "Importance of Control Strategies on Fatigue Life of Floating Wind Turbines" OMAE 2007 Conference paper, OMAE2007-29277.
16.
Beatrice Project with Repower: http://www.beatricewind.co.uk/home/default.asp.
17.
Butterfield, C. et al, "Engineering Challenges for Floating Offshore Wind Turbines" Copenhagen Offshore Wind Conference, 2005.
18.
Studie narr haalbaarheid van en randvoorwaarden voor drijvende offshore windturbines.
ECN, MARIN, Lagerwey the Windmaster, TNO, TUD, MSC, Dec. 2002.
19.
Musial, W.D.
; Butterfield, C.P.
; Boone, A.
"Feasibility of Floating Platform Systems for Wind Turbines", NREL/CP-500-34874.
6  REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE  Form Approved OMB No.
0704-0188  The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.
Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to Department of Defense, Executive Services and Communications Directorate (0704-0188).
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ORGANIZATION.
1.
REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 2.
REPORT TYPE  3.
DATES COVERED (From - To)  October 2007 4.
TITLE AND SUBTITLE  Conference paper 5a.
CONTRACT NUMBER  Overview of Offshore Wind Technology: Preprint  DE-AC36-99-GO10337 5b.
GRANT NUMBER  5c.
PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER  6.
AUTHOR(S)  5d.
PROJECT NUMBER  C.P.
Butterfield, W. Musial, and J. Jonkman  NREL/CP-500-42242 5e.
TASK NUMBER  WER7.5302 5f.
WORK UNIT NUMBER  7.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)  8.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory 1617 Cole Blvd.
Golden, CO 80401-3393 9.
SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)  PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER  NREL/CP-500-42252  10.
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S)  NREL 11.
SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 12.
DISTRIBUTION AVAILABILITY STATEMENT  National Technical Information Service U.S. Department of Commerce 5285 Port Royal Road Springfield, VA 22161 13.
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 14.
ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 Words)  This paper provides a short overview of some of the challenges facing the growth of offshore wind energy technology.
15.
SUBJECT TERMS  wind turbine; offshore; floating; hydrodynamic behavior 16.
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: a.
REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE 17.
LIMITATION 18.
NUMBER OF ABSTRACT OF PAGES 19a.
NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON  Unclassified  Unclassified  Unclassified  UL  19b.
TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) Standard Form 298 (Rev.
8/98) Prescribed by ANSI Std.
Z39.18  F1147-E(09/2007)   Wind Turbine Technology  BWEA Briefing Sheet Wind Turbine Technology  Since earliest times, man has harnessed the power of the wind, with the first mill recorded as long ago as the 6th century AD.
The technology has diversified over the years to include pumping water, grinding grain, powering sawmills and most recently generating electricity, now the fastest growing energy sector worldwide.
Wind turbine technology has developed rapidly in recent years and Europe is at the hub of this hightech industry.
Wind turbines are becoming more powerful, with the latest turbine models having larger blade lengths which can utilise more wind and therefore produce more electricity, bringing down the cost of renewable energy generation.
The first commercial wind farm in the UK, built in 1991 at Delabole in Growth in size of commercial wind turbine design © EWEA Cornwall, used 400 kilowatt (kW) turbines, while the latest trials have involved turbines ten times more powerful, of four megawatts (MW) and above.
The average size of an onshore wind turbine installed in 2005 was approximately 2 MW.
Wind turbines have an average working life of 20-25 years, after which the turbines can be replaced with new ones or decommissioned.
Old turbines can be sold in the second hand market and they also have a scrap value which can be used for any ground restoration work.
1  How Does a Wind Turbine Work?
Wind turbines produce electricity by using the natural power of the wind to drive a generator.
The wind is a clean and sustainable fuel source, it does not create emissions and it will never run out as it is constantly replenished by energy from the sun.
In many ways, wind turbines are the natural evolution of traditional windmills, but now typically have three blades, which rotate around a horizontal hub at the top of a steel tower.
Most wind turbines start generating electricity at wind speeds of around 3-4 metres per second (m/s), (8 miles per hour); generate maximum 'rated' power at around 15 m/s (30mph); and shut down to prevent storm damage at 25 m/s or above (50mph).
Wind Turbine Technology Generating electricity from the wind is simple: Wind passes over the blades exerting a turning force.
The turbine rotating blades turn a shaft inside the nacelle, which goes into a gearbox.
The gearbox increases the rotation speed for the generator, which uses magnetic fields to convert the rotational energy into Components of a typical wind  www.embracewind.com  www.bwea.com  electrical energy.
The power output goes to a transformer, which converts the electricity from the generator at around 700 Volts (V) to the right voltage for the distribution system, typically between 11 kV and 132 kV.
The regional electricity distribution networks or National Grid transmit the electricity around the country, and on into homes and businesses.
Offshore Technology Offshore wind farms are an exciting new area for the industry, largely due to the fact that there are higher wind speeds available offshore and economies of scale allow for the installation of larger size wind turbines offshore.
Offshore wind turbine technology is based on the same principles as onshore technology.
Foundations are constructed to hold the superstructure, of which there are a number of designs, but the most common is a driven pile.
The top of the foundation is painted a bright colour to make it visible to ships and has an access platform to allow maintenance teams to dock.
Subsea cables take the power to a transformer, (which can be either offshore or onshore) which converts the electricity to a high voltage (normally between 33 kV and 132 kv) before connecting to the grid at a substation on land.
The building of Scroby Sands offshore wind farm Top row, from left: Offshore wind turbines have a brightly coloured base; on to which the wind turbine tower is embedded; jackhammers drive the monopile into the seabed.
Bottom row: installation of the nacelle; commissioned wind turbine.
Images © EON UK Renewables, BWEA.
Operation and Maintenance Both onshore and offshore wind turbines have instruments on top of the nacelle, an anemometer and a wind vane, which respectively measure wind speed and direction.
When the wind changes direction, motors turn the nacelle, and the blades along with it, around to face into the wind.
The blades also 'pitch' or angle to ensure that the optimum amount of power is extracted from the wind.
All this information is recorded by computers and transmitted to a control centre, which can be many miles away.
Wind turbines are not physically staffed, although each will have  www.embracewind.com  periodic mechanical checks, often carried out by local firms.
The onboard computers also monitor the performance of each turbine component, and will automatically shut the turbine down if any problems are detected, alerting an engineer that an onsite visit is required.
The amount of electricity produced from a wind turbine depends on three factors: 1) Wind speed The power available from the wind is a function of the cube of the wind speed.
Therefore if the wind blows at twice the speed, its energy content will increase eight-fold.
Turbines at a site where the wind speed averages 8 m/s produce around 75-100% more electricity than those where the average wind speed is 6 m/s.
2) Wind turbine availability This is the capability to operate when the wind is blowing, i.e.
when the wind turbine is not undergoing maintenance.
This is typically 98% or above for modern European machines.
3) The way wind turbines are arranged  Typical power curve of a wind turbine storm protection shutdown rated wind speed typical average wind speed cut-in wind speed  2 power (MW)  1  0  0  5  10  15 wind speed (m/s)  20  25  30  LIGHT AIR  MODERATE BREEZE  LIGHT BREEZE  GENTLE BREEZE  STORM  CALM  STRONG BREEZE  Wind farms are laid out so that one turbine does not take the wind away from another.
However other factors such as environmental considerations, visibility and grid connection requirements often take precedence over the optimum wind capture layout.
Stand-alone and Grid-connected Small Wind Turbines Small scale wind turbines can be used in domestic, community and smaller wind energy projects and these can be either stand-alone or grid-connected systems.
Standalone systems are used to generate electricity for charging batteries to run small electrical applications, often in remote locations where it is expensive or not physically possible to connect to a mains power supply.
Such examples include rural farms and island communities, with typical applications being water heating or pumping, electric livestock fencing, lighting or any kind of small electronic system needed to control or monitor remote equipment.
With grid-connected turbines the output from the wind turbine is directly connected to the existing mains electricity supply.
This type of system can be used both for individual wind turbines and for wind farms exporting electricity to the electricity network.
A grid-connected wind turbine can be a good proposition if your consumption of electricity is high.
@Proven Energy  www.bwea.com  VIOLENT STORM  NEAR GALE  FRESH BREEZE  SEVERE GALE  GALE  Wind Turbine Technology Sep 2005  Can We Rely on the Wind?
Wind generation is often described as intermittent, as the wind does not blow continuously.
This is a misnomer as it implies an 'all or nothing' delivery of energy.
An individual wind turbine will generate electricity for 70-85% of the time and its electricity output varies between zero and full output in accordance with the wind speed.
However, the combined output of the UK's entire wind power portfolio shows less variability, given the differences in wind speeds over the country as a whole.
Whilst the amount of wind generation varies, it rarely (if ever) goes completely to zero, nor to full output.
In order to maintain security of supplies, a second-bysecond balance between generation and demand must be achieved.
An excess of generation causes the system frequency to rise whilst an excess of demand causes the system frequency to fall.
The electricity system is designed and operated in such a way as to cope with large and small fluctuations in supply and demand.
No Wind turbine nacelles.
Picture supplied by SLP Energy.
© Charles Hodge power station is totally reliable Photography, Lowestoft and demand is also uncertain.
Therefore, the system operator establishes reserves that provide a capability to achieve balance given the statistics of variations expected over different timescales.
The variability of wind generation is but one component of the generation and demand variations that are considered when setting reserve levels.
The GB System Operator, National Grid Transco stated in their Seven Year Statement that "based on recent analysis of the incidence and variation of wind speed we have found that the expected intermittency of wind does not pose such a major problem for stability and we are confident that this can be adequately managed.4"  Summary Wind turbine technology has developed and matured over the years and this technology now forms an increasingly important part of the UK's electricity industry.
Renewable energy is vital in our fight against climate change and technologies such as wind energy can help in building a sustainable electricity generation system for the future.
References and further information 1 EWEA (2004), Wind Energy - The Facts.
An Analysis of Wind Energy in the EU-25, Executive Summary, from at www.ewea.org 2 See www.bwea.com/edu/calcs.html for wind energy calculations 3 For more details on integrating wind energy to the electricity network see The Carbon Trust and DTI (2004), Renewables Network Impact Study, www.carbontrust.org.uk; National Grid (2004), Seven Year Statement, go to www.nationalgrid.com 4 National Grid (2004) Seven Year Statement, available at www.nationalgrid.com 5 For other BWEA Briefing Sheets, go to www.bwea.com/energy/briefing-sheets.html 6 For latest wind energy statistics go to www.bwea.com/ukwed  BWEA, 1 Aztec Row, Berners Road, London N1 0PW t 020 7689 1960 • f 020 7689 1969 • e info@bwea.com Printed by Kent Art Printers on Revive Uncoated: minimum 80% de-inked post consumer waste and 20% mill broke  www.bwea.com   Technical Description and Data of the Wind Turbine  REpower 48/600  REpower Systems AG, Hamburg Husum Rendsburg Trampe, Germany Dok.-Nr.
:D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  Technical Description REpower 48/600  Table of Contents 1 Description of the Wind Turbine ............................................................................. 3 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 Design Concept............................................................................................... 3 Rotor ............................................................................................................... 3 Gearbox .......................................................................................................... 3 Brake System ................................................................................................... 4 Generator ........................................................................................................ 4 Yaw System ..................................................................................................... 4 Nacelle............................................................................................................ 5 Tower.............................................................................................................. 5 Corrosion Protection........................................................................................ 5  1.10 Lightning Protection ........................................................................................ 5 1.11 Remote Data Monitoring ................................................................................. 6 2 3 4 Technical data.......................................................................................................... 7 Predicted power curve of REpower 48/600.............................................................. 8 Calculated annual energy production ...................................................................... 9  Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 2/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  1  Description of the Wind Turbine  1.1 Design Concept The 48/600 wind turbine, type-tested by Germanischer Lloyd, has a nominal electrical power of 600 kW.
The rotor diameter is 48.4 m, and power control is based on the "stall" principle.
For the sake of smooth connection to the grid, a set of thyristors is interposed between the mains supply and the generator during the start phase.
Even at inland sites with relatively low wind speed, the 48/600 attains very good production because of its large rotor and correspondingly high tower.
1.2 Rotor The rotor consists of three blades rigidly flange-mounted on a cast hub.
The overall diameter is 48.4 m giving a swept area of 1840 m².
As a function of wind speed the rotational speed is 14 or 21 rpm.
This matching of rotational speed makes the 48/600 particularly suitable for inland locations.
The material of the blades is a glass-fibre reinforced plastic (GRP).
Each blade tip is pivotable and can be turned 74 degrees to the main blade.
The three blade tips are working by an independent hydraulic-system.
The hydraulic-pressure is required to keep the tips in the operational position.
1.3 Gearbox The gearbox is a planetary/spur gear system and meets all requirements of the Germanischer Lloyd classification society.
These components are designed and constructed by an experienced transmission manufacturer in accordance with REpower specifications.
The ratio is about 72.
Wind turbines made by REpower Systems AG are distinguished by their particularly quiet running.
Vibration dampers specially developed by us are used for the decoupling of structureborne noise.
These guarantee maximum attenuation between gearbox and machine bed.
Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 3/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  1.4 Brake System The blade tip adjustment works independently in each individual blade.
If one system fails, the aerodynamic brakes in the other two blades continue to be active.
Even at maximum output, extending and twisting just one blade tip is sufficient to bring the plant into the safe rotational speed range.
In addition, there is a mechanical disk brake on the fast shaft between drive train and generator.
The two braking systems, the aerodynamic and mechanical disk brake, work independently of each other.
In order to guarantee safe braking even in the event of failure of individual components (the hydraulics, for example) or a mains failure, the braking systems are configured to be fail-safe.
Besides this, an independent power supply is provided for the controller that guarantees safe braking of the wind turbine in the event of a voltage or grid failure.
1.5 Generator The generator is a two-stage, pole-changeable asynchronous machine.
Depending on wind speed, the first stage supplies up to 160 kW and the second up to 600 kW.
The generator is of protection class IP 54.
Cooling is effected by forced-air ventilation.
Temperature sensors are installed both on the bearings and in the windings for monitoring the machine temperature.
Various covers, e.g.
on the fast shaft, make it impossible to come into contact with moving parts.
The housing of the generator is earthed in order to provide equipotential bonding.
The generator is elastically supported on the machine bed by noise and vibration-decoupling elements, for the sake of improved noise insulation and decoupling.
1.6 Yaw System The nacelle is connected to the tower by means of a four-point bearing.
Yawing of the nacelle is achieved by means of two electrical servo drives.
Hydraulic brakes serve to secure the nacelle.
In the case of grid failure the brakes are active.
An electronic wind-direction sensor system with the corresponding software controls the switch-on times and the direction of rotation of the motors.
It also operates the automatic cable untwisting when under varying wind direction the plant has turned repeatedly in one direction.
Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 4/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  1.7 Nacelle The nacelle is fitted with a sound-proofed GRP covering.
In order to provide optimal conditions for servicing and maintenance, the nacelle is of sufficiently large dimension.
Maintenance work can be done even in poor weather without opening the nacelle covering.
Access from the tower into the nacelle is gained via a hatch in the basic frame.
There is additionally a maintenance platform for accessing the components underneath the basic frame.
All components, as for example the azimuth system and the hydraulics, can be operated via the control panels of the nacelle.
For safety there is an "emergency button".
1.8 Tower The tower is made from steel piping and consists of three segments, regardless of the hub height.
In accordance with regulations there are various assembly platforms in the tower as well as additional landings incorporated into the ladder.
An internal ladder makes it possible to ascend regardless of the weather.
The power cabinets are accommodated in the bottom of the tower and are thus protected against the effects of weather.
The plant can be completely operated from here.
For safety, an "emergency button" is provided here as well.
1.9 Corrosion Protection All parts of the plant, from the tower through the machine bed and on to the nacelle covering, are protected by a special multiple coating against corrosion and other environmental influences.
The coating system complies with all the requirements of DIN EN ISO 12944.
1.10 Lightning Protection The rotor blades are fitted with a proven lightning protection system.
Lightning is led away via receptors in the rotor tips and the "tip cables" connected to them, which control the blade tips.
The lightning is transmitted to the bearing ring via slip-rings and air gaps on the main shaft.
From there, the overvoltage is led off to the tower and finally into the ground via foundation earth electrodes and deep earth electrodes.
Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 5/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  1.11 Remote Data Monitoring All the operational data for the wind turbine can be retrieved over a telephone connection (fixed ISDN network) using a modem.
The remote data monitoring software is supplied when the wind turbine is erected.
Some of the most important operational data that can be retrieved via remote data transmission are mentioned below:  Momentary electrical power of generator Rotor and generator rotational speed Gearbox and bearing temperatures Hydraulic pressures (pitch adjustment of the blade tips, disk brake, etc.)
Azimuth angle Momentary wind speed and direction Statistics: - daily, monthly and annual energy production figures - fault statistics, and much else.
Faults can be detected and eliminated using these operational data.
In addition, in the event of faults in plant operation, the corresponding error message is sent automatically to the responsible service point via remote data monitoring so that rectification of the fault is organised and performed without delay.
Besides the fundamentally low liability to faults of the type 48/600 wind power plant, this automatic fault reporting assists in attaining high availability.
Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 6/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  2  Technical data 3 13.5 20 50 , 65 or 75 3 48.4 glass fibre reinforced plastic (GRP) 1840 upwind 14 or 21 53 stall 3-stage planetary/spur gear system 72 600 or 160 1523 or 1010 pole-changeable asynchronous generator IP 54 690 approx.
9.45 approx.
25 kW min-1 m/s m/s m/s m  Basic Design data Cut-in wind speed Rated wind speed Cut-out wind speed Hub height Rotor Number of blades Rotor diameter Material Swept area Rotor position Rotor speed Blade-tip speed Power control Gearbox Type Gear ratio Generator Nominal power Rotational speed Type Protection class Voltage Weights Rotor blades Nacelle incl.
hub Braking systems Aerodynamic Mechanical Operating mode  m m² min-1 m/s  V t t  three independent tip-brakes disk brake at the high speed shaft independent in "fail-safe" function  All technical data are subject to modification due to ongoing technical development.
Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 7/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  3  Predicted power curve of REpower 48/600 48.4 1.225 3.0 20 101 m kg/m³ m/s m/s dB(A)  Rotor diameter Air density Cut-in speed Cut-out wind speed Noise level (95% of nominal power)* *measured in accordance with FGW Guideline Reference characteristic (basis of guarantee)  wind speed v [m/s] 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.0 13.0 14.0 15.0 16.0 17.0 18.0 19.0 20.0  electrical output P [kW] 2 20 52 88 152 239 318 418 490 556 590 605 610 605 600 590 580 570  Based on: power curve measured on 13 March 2002 by Wind-consult GmbH, report 368LKB01  Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 8/9  Technical Description REpower 48/600  4  Calculated annual energy production  The calculated figures for annual energy production are indicative values under standard conditions.
They cannot replace a site-based prediction.
Wind speed at hub height [m/s] 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8  annual energy production [MWh] 841 1,086 1,319 1,552 1,800 2,015 2,234  (information subject to change)  Basis for the calculation: Wind speed at hub height air density 1.225 kg/m³ turbulence intensity 10% theoretical availability 100% Single plant Rayleigh distribution, k=2 roughness class 1 (roughness length 0.03 m)  Doc.-No.
: D-80.1-GP.SD.03-A-A-GB  2002-09-10  page 9/9
